Pregnancy and maternity discrimination
1 . What the law says
'Pregnancy and maternity' is one of 9 'protected characteristics' covered by discrimination law (Equality Act 2010).
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination includes direct discrimination and victimisation.
Discrimination can happen in any area of work. It can result from decisions made at work or from how people behave towards each
other.
It could be a regular pattern of behaviour or a one-off incident. It can happen during recruitment, at work or when people are on
maternity leave.
How the law defines pregnancy and maternity discrimination
The Equality Act 2010 says that pregnancy and maternity discrimination is unfavourable treatment that happens:
because someone is pregnant
because someone is on maternity leave or has the right to take maternity leave
because of pregnancy-related illness
Someone is only protected from discrimination if their employer knows they're pregnant. Or if the employer should reasonably have
known.
The protected period
The law protects people from discrimination during the 'protected period'.
The protected period starts when someone becomes pregnant. It usually ends when one of the following happens:
their maternity leave ends
they return to work
they leave their job
The date someone returns to work might not be their first working day. For example, they could take annual leave straight after
maternity leave. In this situation, the protected period ends on the last day of maternity leave.
For some people, the protected period ends 2 weeks after the end of their pregnancy. For example if:
they're not entitled to maternity leave
their pregnancy ends within the first 24 weeks, for example they have a miscarriage

After the protected period
Some things that happen after the protected period might still be discrimination.
This applies if the discrimination is connected to something that happened during the protected period. For example, if the
discrimination is because of a pregnancy-related illness that continued or got worse.
What the law does not cover
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination law does not include:
indirect discrimination
harassment
anything that happens after the protected period – unless the discrimination relates to something that happened during the
pregnancy or maternity leave
However, some things could be sex discrimination instead. This is when someone is put at a disadvantage or treated less favourably
because they're a woman. For example, discrimination related to breastfeeding.
Who is protected by discrimination law
At work, the law protects the following people against discrimination:
anyone who works for an employer
contractors and self-employed people hired to personally do the work
job applicants
former workers
Other pregnancy and maternity rights
A pregnant employee has special protection in a redundancy situation. The redundancy protection lasts for 18 months after the baby is
born.
This means that by law, their employer must offer them a suitable alternative vacancy, if there is one.
If someone is dismissed because they're pregnant or on maternity leave, this is 'automatically unfair dismissal'. It could also be
discrimination.

2. Types of discrimination
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination includes:
direct discrimination
victimisation
It's important to understand the different types of discrimination. This is so you know what your rights and responsibilities are under
discrimination law (Equality Act 2010).
Direct discrimination
Direct pregnancy and maternity discrimination is when someone is put at a disadvantage or treated unfavourably because:
they're pregnant
they're on maternity leave or have the right to take maternity leave
they have a pregnancy-related illness
Example – work performance
Ash is pregnant and announces this at work, 2 months into a new job. A week later, the manager says Ash's work is not good enough.
They say Ash will not pass the 3-month probation period. Before mentioning the pregnancy, Ash had good performance reports. If the
manager's decision is because of the pregnancy, this is direct discrimination.
Example – redundancy
An employer wants to make redundancies. They consult everyone, apart from Naz who's on maternity leave. This is direct
discrimination.
The employer makes Naz redundant. Naz is not offered a suitable alternative vacancy, even though there is one. The employer is not
following the law on redundancy protection. This is likely to be automatically unfair dismissal.
Example – recruitment

While pregnant, Erin applies for a promotion and gets it. Erin trusts the new manager enough to tell them about the pregnancy. But the
new manager withdraws the offer. They say they need someone who will be available for training in the new role. This is direct
discrimination.
Example – health and safety issues
Farah works with toxic chemicals. Farah's manager knows Farah is pregnant but does not do a health and safety risk assessment.
Farah is very worried and refuses to do work that might harm the baby. The employer starts a disciplinary procedure against Farah for
refusing to work. This is direct discrimination. The employer has also ignored their legal responsibilities under health and safety law.
Example – zero-hours work
Isa is on a zero-hours contract. After calling in sick because of morning sickness, Isa is no longer offered any work. The employer says
they cannot rely on Isa any more. This is direct discrimination.
Example – returning from maternity leave
Mel returns to work after maternity leave. Mel's employer says they prefer the person who did the maternity cover. They offer Mel a
different job at the same pay. Because Mel's original job still exists, this is likely to be direct discrimination.
Victimisation
Victimisation is when someone is treated unfavourably as a result of being involved with a discrimination complaint. It does not matter
if the complaint was made by them or someone else.
The law also protects someone from victimisation if someone else thinks they're involved with a complaint.
Ways someone can be victimised include being labelled a troublemaker, being left out, or not being allowed to do something.
Example of victimisation
Steph is on maternity leave. The rest of the team gets a bonus for completing a large project. Steph does not get a bonus, despite
working on the same project before going on maternity leave. Steph makes a complaint.
After returning to work, Steph applies to work on an important project. Their manager blocks the application, saying that Steph is
difficult and not a team player. This is victimisation.
Indirect discrimination and harassment
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination law does not include indirect discrimination and harassment.
However, someone could experience sex discrimination if they're put at a disadvantage or treated less favourably because they're a
woman.
Examples of this could include:
offensive comments about pregnant women
not providing facilities for breastfeeding or expressing breast milk
an employer refusing a flexible working request from a new mother without having a genuine business reason

Example – expressing breast milk at work
Leigh needs to express breast milk at work. The employer provides a space that's not very private. Leigh feels embarrassed and upset
about the lack of privacy. Leigh tells the employer, who says Leigh is being too sensitive. This cannot be pregnancy and maternity
discrimination because harassment is not covered by this law. It's likely to be a type of sex discrimination called harassment related to
sex.
Example – flexible working requests
After returning from maternity leave, Zia puts in a flexible working request for reduced hours. This is to help with childcare. The
manager refuses the request without any discussion. They say the team "does not do flexible working". Rejecting the request without a
genuine business reason could be indirect sex discrimination. This is because more women than men are likely to be put at a
disadvantage.
When a decision might not be discrimination
Sometimes an employer might need to change someone's job when they become pregnant. This applies when there's a health and
safety risk.
Examples of health and safety risks could include:
work-related stress
lifting and carrying heavy objects
sitting or standing for long periods of time
exposure to toxic chemicals and radioactive materials
An employer has a legal duty to carry out an individual risk assessment and remove any health and safety risks. Changing someone's
job is not discrimination, provided the work is still suitable for them.

3. Discrimination complaints
If someone has experienced discrimination at work, they can make a complaint to their employer. The employer should take it
seriously and look into it as soon as possible.

Pregnancy and maternity discrimination can be very distressing. It can have a severe impact on someone's mental health and
wellbeing. In some cases, it can also affect:
physical health, including the health of the baby
career progression
someone's financial situation
Employers should make sure that anyone who's experienced discrimination feels safe, protected and supported.
If you've experienced discrimination
If you believe you've experienced discrimination at work, you can make a complaint to your employer.
You should make a complaint as soon as possible. However, if you make a complaint a long time after something has happened, your
employer should still take it seriously.
Handling a discrimination complaint
If you're an employer or manager, you should look into any discrimination complaint in a way that's fair and sensitive to:
the person who made the complaint
anyone accused of discrimination
You should make sure that:
everyone in your organisation knows how to report discrimination
anyone accused of discrimination is treated in an impartial and fair way
Someone making a complaint may be on maternity leave or off sick. You should agree with them how the complaint will be handled.
Do not ignore or delay handling a complaint just because someone is not currently working.
4. Preventing discrimination
All employers should take steps to make sure pregnancy and maternity discrimination does not happen at work.
As an employer, you should aim for a culture where:
everyone knows that pregnancy and maternity discrimination is not acceptable
anyone who's pregnant, on maternity leave or returning to work feels safe, supported and valued
you recognise and promote the benefits of an inclusive organisation
Steps for preventing pregnancy and maternity discrimination
Many ways to prevent discrimination apply equally to all 'protected characteristics'.

Measures that are specific to preventing pregnancy and maternity discrimination include:
having a pregnancy and maternity policy
understanding your responsibilities as an employer
making sure managers understand their responsibilities
considering things that affect workers who are pregnant, on maternity leave or returning to work
being aware of stereotypes
recognising the impact of discrimination on mental health and wellbeing
If you're a small organisation with limited resources, you might not be able to take all measures. But you have a duty to prevent
discrimination, and there's still a lot you can do. Making your organisation more inclusive does not have to be costly or complicated.
If you're a public sector employer, you also have legal responsibilities under the public sector equality duty.
Having a pregnancy and maternity policy
You should consider having a pregnancy and maternity policy. This can:
help everyone understand their rights and responsibilities
help to prevent discrimination, which can happen when employers make decisions without thinking them through
A policy could set out:
how and when someone should tell you they're pregnant
your approach to assessing and managing health and safety risks
processes around pregnancy-related illness, for example recording pregnancy-related absence separately from other sickness
absence
how you handle time off for 'antenatal' or other pregnancy-related appointments
how someone should tell you when they'll start and end maternity leave
your approach to paid holiday that's 'accrued' (built up) during maternity leave
whether you offer statutory (legal minimum) or enhanced maternity pay
how you'll keep in touch while someone's on maternity leave
how someone will be supported when they return to work
facilities for anyone who's breastfeeding
If you're a small employer, you might not want to create a policy. However, you should still think about your responsibilities and how
you would support someone who's pregnant.
Make sure other policies do not discriminate
You should check all relevant policies to make sure they do not discriminate. For example, policies around absence, recruitment or
redundancy.
Understanding your responsibilities as an employer
As an employer, you have certain legal responsibilities when someone is pregnant or on maternity leave. Understanding these can
help to avoid discrimination.
Your responsibilities include:
health and safety – you must do a risk assessment

confidentiality – you must not share information about someone's pregnancy without their permission
recruitment – you must not withdraw a job offer or promotion because someone is pregnant or on maternity leave
following redundancy law – offering a suitable alternative vacancy to an employee who's pregnant or whose baby was born up
to 18 months ago
following the law on dismissals – you must not dismiss someone just because they're pregnant or on maternity leave
communication during maternity leave – you must tell someone about important changes and opportunities
returning from maternity leave – someone has the right to return to the same job, if it still exists
Making sure managers understand their responsibilities
You should make sure managers and supervisors understand their role in supporting workers who are pregnant or on maternity leave.
Managers should:
know what the organisation's policies are around pregnancy and maternity
support anyone who's pregnant and make sure they understand their rights
agree how they will keep in touch with anyone going on maternity leave
prepare for someone's return to work
be a good example of inclusive behaviour for others to follow
look out for any discriminatory behaviour
deal with any discrimination that happens
Considering things that affect workers who are pregnant or returning to work
Pregnant workers or those returning from maternity leave might have specific needs or things they're affected by.
Managers should talk with people about what they need and what support can be provided.
During pregnancy, this can include:
time off for 'antenatal' or other pregnancy-related appointments
time off for pregnancy-related sickness
support during a difficult pregnancy or after a pregnancy loss
During maternity leave or after a return to work, this can include:
someone who's breastfeeding needing somewhere suitable to rest or express breast milk
making a flexible working request to help with childcare

Avoid making decisions based on assumptions about pregnancy and maternity.
Examples of stereotyping could include:
assuming that women who have children are not interested in career development
thinking that pregnant workers are less able to do their job or less committed
Supporting mental health and wellbeing
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination can seriously affect someone's mental health and wellbeing. People often feel targeted,
pushed out or ignored. It can have an impact on attendance and work performance.
People can also have mental health problems linked to pregnancy and maternity, for example postnatal depression.
As an employer, you have a 'duty of care'. You must do all you reasonably can to support the health, safety and wellbeing of your
workers.
