Mediation at work
1 . What mediation is and how it can help
Mediation is a way to mend relationships when there is a disagreement at work.
It is held by a 'mediator' (neutral person). The mediator is impartial. This means they do not take sides. They're there to help everyone
involved find a solution they can all agree to.
Mediation is not about judging who was right or wrong in the past. It looks at how to agree on working together in the future.
Mediation is a quick way to resolve disagreement at work. It is also:
less formal
flexible
voluntary
confidential
usually not legally binding
How mediation can help
Mediation helps to mend relationships at work by:
finding solutions that everyone agrees to
improving communication
allowing everyone involved to have control of what's finally agreed
There are many benefits of mediation. For example, it can help to:
reduce stress
keep valuable employees
avoid more formal processes, such as going to employment tribunal
stop more grievances being raised
avoid paying high costs, for example, employment tribunal claims
Mediation outcomes are decided by everyone involved and can be flexible. Outcomes might include:
an acknowledgement of each party's views
a commitment to change behaviour
a commitment to regularly review the agreement reached
an agreement to review policies and procedures
an agreement to share work more fairly and provide more responsibility

A voluntary and confidential process
If you do not want to take part in mediation, you do not have to.
Mediation is voluntary and confidential. The mediator will agree with everyone involved what information can be shared outside the
mediation and how. If you do not reach an agreement, anything that's been said during the mediation must be kept confidential and
cannot be used in future procedures.
When mediation can be used
Mediation can be used to resolve disagreements around relationships at work.
For example, you can use mediation to resolve:
bullying and harassment
communication problems
personality clashes
relationship breakdowns
Generally, mediation is not used to resolve disputes such as pay or issues related to dismissal or conduct.
When to start mediation
It's a good idea to try and resolve the problem informally first, before thinking about using mediation.
Find out how to raise a problem at work
If the problem cannot be resolved informally, you can use mediation. Mediation can be used at any stage in a disagreement, but it's
best to start it as soon as possible. The earlier the disagreement is dealt with, the less chance there is of things getting worse.
You could also use mediation to rebuild relationships after a disciplinary or grievance process.
Guidance for employers
Read our mediation guidance for employers written with the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development
2. Introducing mediation at work
If you're an employer looking to introduce mediation in your organisation, you should think about what you want to achieve from using
mediation.
For example, this could be to:
reduce grievances and conflict
improve the culture at work
There are 2 ways you can introduce mediation in your organisation. You can:
use an external mediator who comes to your organisation
set up your own internal mediation scheme by training employees to act as mediators

The option you choose should be suitable for your organisation. For example, a larger organisation might invest in its own mediation
scheme. A smaller organisation might use an external mediator when necessary. Or, some might choose a combination.
Using an external mediator
If you use an external mediator, it's a good idea for a person or team to be responsible for overseeing mediation arrangements.
You should also include the expected cost for mediation in the organisation's budget.
In smaller organisations
Using an external mediator might be a good option for a smaller organisation. This is because it can be expensive to set up an internal
scheme. It can also be difficult to make sure that employees in a smaller organisation are:
impartial – the parties involved should not know the mediator
available for mediation – employees will need time off for mediations
Using an external mediator means that you can mediate when necessary without taking up your employees' time.
In larger organisations
You might still use an external mediator in some situations, even if you have invested in your own internal mediation scheme.
For example, it might be appropriate to use an external mediator when:
the internal mediator has a conflict of interest
an internal mediator is not available quickly enough
those involved in potential mediation are senior managers
the issue involves a very sensitive situation
If you use an external mediator who comes to your organisation, you need to be sure that the mediator will:
not take sides
work to find a solution that everyone agrees on
There are many mediation providers you can choose from, including Acas.
Once you have decided which provider you're going to use, you should discuss:
the contract
costs
timings
Find out about Acas mediation support
Setting up an internal mediation scheme
If you're thinking about introducing your own internal mediation scheme, you could pilot a scheme first to see if it works. For example,
you could set up a pilot scheme in one area or region of your organisation. If it's successful, you could expand the scheme.
It's a good idea for a person or team to be responsible for overseeing mediation arrangements. For example, telling potential parties
about the mediation process and keeping statistics so you can evaluate your mediation scheme.

Selecting employees to act as internal mediators
When selecting employees to act as mediators, you can ask:
employees to volunteer
managers to nominate employees
If employees volunteer, it's a good idea to set minimum standards which they should meet. For example, having an understanding of
conflict management. This will help make sure that only those who meet certain criteria apply, and you do not have too many
applications to review.
You should select a diverse range of employees to act as mediators.
This will help you:
match mediators to parties more easily
make sure that mediators are impartial
Training employees to act as internal mediators
If you decide to train your employees to act as mediators, you should:
make sure mediation responsibilities are included in their job descriptions
give employees time off for mediations
Employees who act as mediators need to be trained in mediation techniques. They also need to understand their role and how it fits in
with their organisation's policies and procedures.
Acas offers accredited mediation training called the Certificate in Internal Workplace Mediation (CIWM). This training gives trainees the
skills and knowledge they need to effectively mediate in their own organisation.
Find out more about the Certificate in Internal Workplace Mediation (CIWM)
Acas also provides:
mediation skills training for managers
conflict management training
Including mediation in your policies
Mediation should be introduced as part of your organisation's approach to people management. There are many ways you can include
mediation in policies and procedures.
For example you could include it in:
employment contracts
your bullying and harassment policy
your grievance or dispute resolution procedure
Getting support from your trade union and managers
When you introduce mediation to your organisation, you should get support from:

senior managers
line managers
trade unions
employee representatives
You should work with them to introduce mediation, so that they understand:
why mediation is being introduced
the benefits it can bring
how it will be embedded in the organisation
Getting this support will help you to promote mediation in your organisation as a way to resolve conflict.
Launching and promoting mediation
You should think about how you're going to launch and promote mediation in your organisation.
If you've set up your own internal scheme, you could have a formal launch to promote the scheme.
If you're using external mediators, you should promote mediation across the organisation so that people are aware of it.
It's up to you whether you decide to launch mediation in a high-profile way, or engage people over time.
You can promote mediation as an option that's:
flexible
confidential
less formal
voluntary
You could promote mediation through:
intranet articles
leaflets
posters
information from HR
workshops for trade union representatives and managers
Related content
/tailored-support