Sick leave
1 . When an employee is off sick
Most employees will need to take sick leave at some point in their working lives.
Both physical and mental health problems can count as sickness. Employers must treat mental and physical health as equally
important.
Reporting sickness absence
When someone is off sick, they can 'self-certify' for 7 calendar days, including weekends. This means they can tell their employer
they're not well enough to work. They do not need to provide medical evidence.
If they're off sick for more than 7 days, an employee will need to get a fit note from a registered healthcare professional.
Find out more about fit notes and proof of sickness
Sick pay
If someone is off sick they might have a right to sick pay.
Find out more about sick pay
Sickness and holiday
Sickness and holiday can happen at the same time.
For example, an employee might:
take holiday while on sick leave
become sick while taking holiday
Find out more about sick pay and holiday pay
Keeping in touch during sick leave
An employer can contact an employee who is off sick. How much contact is appropriate will depend on the employee's individual
circumstances.
The employer and employee should agree what is an appropriate level of contact.
Find out more about keeping in touch during absence

Returning to work after sick leave
When an employee returns to work after being off sick they should have a return to work meeting with their employer.
This is an opportunity to make sure the employee:
is well enough to work
has any support they need
In some cases, a phased return to work might be appropriate. This is when someone who's been absent gradually builds up to
returning to work.
Find out more about returning to work after absence
If someone's off sick due to poor mental health
If an employee takes sick leave due to a mental health problem, their employer should look into whether this was because of
something at work. If it is work-related, they should take steps to resolve the cause.
It's important that their employer takes it seriously and with the same care as a physical illness.
Find out more about:
supporting mental health at work
managing work-related stress
2. Sending someone home due to sickness
If an employer feels an employee is not well enough to work, they can send them home or tell them not to work.
If the employee agrees
If the employee agrees they're too sick to work, this time off is likely to count as sick leave. They should get any sick pay they're
entitled to.
If the employee thinks they're well enough to work
If the employee feels they are well enough to work, they should make this clear to their employer.
Their employer might still insist that they should not work. In this case, the time off should not be counted as sick leave.
As the employer has made the decision for their employee not to work, they should pay them their usual pay.
Presenteeism
If an employee continues to work when they're unwell, this might suggest there's a problem with 'presenteeism' at their organisation.
Presenteeism is when staff continue to attend work even though they're sick. It has become more common with more people working
from home.

Presenteeism can have a negative impact on staff morale and productivity. It can also mean employees take longer to recover from
illness.
To reduce presenteeism, employers should:
have a consistent policy on sickness absence that does not punish employees for taking sick leave
have return to work meetings with employees to check they're well enough to be at work
offer phased returns to work, where appropriate, so that employees can gradually come back to work after absence
create a culture at work where employees do not feel pressured to work when they're ill
promote positive wellbeing among employees
3. Sickness and ending employment
Someone's employment can end while they're on sick leave. For example if:
the employer dismisses them
they choose to resign
Dismissal during sick leave
An employer might dismiss an employee during sick leave. For example, because:
their illness means they're no longer capable of doing their job
they're being made redundant
Capability
An employer should take steps to avoid dismissing an employee on the grounds of capability.
They should look at ways they can support the employee to return to work. For example:
making changes to their role
using a phased return to work
An employer must make reasonable adjustments if an employee is disabled.
Find out more about:
dismissing someone because of capability or conduct issues
capability and performance when someone is disabled
Redundancy
If an employer is considering making redundancies, they should keep employees who are off sick up to date during the process.

An employer could be discriminating against an employee if they're off sick and miss something important. For example, if their sick
leave is related to pregnancy or a disability.
Resignation during sick leave
An employee can resign while they're off sick.
They should follow the right process to resign.
Find out more about resignation
Resignation and benefits
An employee who is off sick might find that resigning from work will affect their benefits.
If you're considering resigning due to ill-health and you think it might affect your benefits, contact Citizens Advice.
Taking sick leave during the notice period
An employee can take sick leave during their notice period.
The organisation's usual rules about reporting sickness absence will apply.
What the employee gets paid depends on:
why their employment is ending
what their notice period is
what their employment contract says
Find out more about pay during the notice period