Reasonable adjustments at work
1 . What reasonable adjustments are
Reasonable adjustments are changes an employer makes to remove or reduce a disadvantage related to someone's disability. For
example:
finding a different way to do something
making changes to the workplace
changing someone's working arrangements
providing equipment, services or support
Reasonable adjustments are specific to an individual person. They can be for physical or mental health conditions. They can cover any
area of work.
It's not enough for employers to provide disabled people with exactly the same working conditions as non-disabled people. Employers
must make reasonable adjustments by law.
Some disabled people might not need or want adjustments, although this might change over time.
When an employer must make reasonable adjustments
The law (Equality Act 2010) says that employers must make reasonable adjustments for:
employees and workers
contractors and self-employed people hired to personally do the work
job applicants
Employers must make reasonable adjustments when:
they know, or could reasonably be expected to know, someone is disabled
a disabled staff member or job applicant asks for adjustments
someone who's disabled is having difficulty with any part of their job
someone's absence record, sickness record or delay in returning to work is because of, or linked to, their disability
The employer must also:
make reasonable adjustments for anything linked to someone's disability – for example an organisation might not allow dogs at
work but make a reasonable adjustment for someone with an assistance dog
make sure other people do what's needed for a reasonable adjustment to work – for example if someone needs information
presented in a certain format, making sure other people at work do that
An employer could be liable under the law if they do not do these things. If someone does not get the reasonable adjustments they
need they could make a claim to an employment tribunal.

What 'reasonable' means
What is reasonable depends on each situation.
The employer must consider carefully if the adjustment:
will remove or reduce the disadvantage – the employer should talk with the person and not make assumptions
is practical to make
is affordable
could harm the health and safety of others
The employer does not have to change the basic nature of the job.
For example, someone in a call centre asks for a job that does not involve taking calls. This might not be reasonable if there is no other
job to give them.
An employer does not have to make adjustments that are unreasonable. However, they should still find other ways to support the
disabled person. This could include making other adjustments that are reasonable.
Who pays for reasonable adjustments
The employer is responsible for paying for any reasonable adjustments.
Many adjustments will be simple and affordable. However, a small employer might not be able to afford as much as a large
organisation.
Example of when an adjustment is not reasonable because of the cost
An employee who uses a wheelchair asks for a lift to be installed so they can get to the upper floors of their workplace. The employer
looks into this. They find the cost would be damaging to their business.
The employer can turn down the request because it is not reasonable for them. However, they must make other workplace
adjustments that are reasonable. For example, making changes so the employee can do their job entirely on the ground floor.
Support from Access to Work
Access to Work is a government scheme. It helps people with a physical or mental health condition or disability to get or stay in work.
Someone might be eligible for a grant to help pay for practical support.
This is not a substitute for the employer's legal obligation to make reasonable adjustments or pay for them.
Examples of reasonable adjustments
Reasonable adjustments are specific to an individual person. They can cover any area of work.

Finding a different way to do something
For example:
giving someone more time to do written or reading tests that are part of an interview
distributing work differently within a team
giving someone different responsibilities or offering another suitable role
finding a different way to train someone if they find classroom-based training difficult
Making changes to the workplace
For example:
changing the lighting above someone's desk or workstation
changing the layout of a work area or the entrance to a building
providing an accessible car parking space
holding a job interview in a room that's accessible for someone who uses a wheelchair
Changing someone's working arrangements
For example:
changing someone's working patterns
distributing someone's breaks more evenly across the day
flexible working – including home or hybrid working
reasonable adjustments for absence – including paid time off for medical appointments and treatment
a phased return to work after absence
Providing equipment, services or support
For example:
providing extra or adapted equipment, such as chairs, computer software and phones
providing emails and documents in an accessible format
giving one-to-one support, for example to help someone prioritise their work
providing other specialist support, for example a sign language interpreter
More examples
2. Making and handling requests
If someone who's disabled needs support at work it's best for them to talk to the employer as soon as possible about what they need.
Nobody has to tell their employer – or potential employer – they're disabled. But when they do, the employer has a legal responsibility
to support them.
Asking for reasonable adjustments

Anyone who's disabled and who needs a reasonable adjustment should talk with their manager or employer (or their potential
employer if they're applying for a job).
This is so:
the person can explain their situation
the employer can understand how they can help
they can discuss and agree on reasonable adjustments together
Employers should do all they reasonably can to create an environment and recruitment process where people feel safe and
comfortable to talk about disability. This can help towards someone getting the reasonable adjustments they need.
How to make a request
There are various ways someone can make a reasonable adjustment request. They could do it:
in writing – for example in a letter or email
in a meeting with their manager or employer
through a formal process, if the organisation has a process set up for requesting reasonable adjustments
When making a reasonable adjustment request, someone could think about:
what would help them manage their health and work
what might be possible and reasonable for their employer
Use our reasonable adjustment request letter template
How the employer should handle a reasonable adjustment request
When someone's talking about their disability and the support they need, the employer should:
arrange a meeting
listen to the person and try to understand how their disability affects them at work
not make assumptions
consider the person's specific situation
How to decide what reasonable adjustments are needed
Both the employer and the disabled person can suggest what reasonable adjustments might help.
Employers should take the lead from the person asking for reasonable adjustments. This is because they might have a better idea of
what changes would be helpful to them.
Some adjustments might be straightforward to discuss and agree together.
The employer can consider getting medical advice if they need help to decide what adjustments are needed. For example, the
employer could agree with a disabled member of staff to:
get an occupational health assessment
ask the person's doctor – use our template letter to an employee's doctor

An employer does not have to make adjustments that are unreasonable. However, they should still find other ways to support the
disabled person.
Confirming reasonable adjustments
An employer should confirm any agreed reasonable adjustments in writing. This could be in a letter or email to the employee.
Use our reasonable adjustment confirmation letter template
If there are conflicting needs
Sometimes, making adjustments for an employee can cause challenges for people they work with.
For example, making an adjustment for one person might conflict with someone else's needs.
In these circumstances, an employer should take time to consider the needs of individual employees, the team and the organisation.
They should try to find a solution that works for everyone. For example, by considering different options and talking this through with
employees.
If the employer cannot resolve things, they should look at whether the adjustment causing challenges is 'reasonable'. However, they
should consider getting legal advice before refusing a reasonable adjustment request.
Example – balancing needs of different employees
Pat, who has ADHD, finds some work documents overwhelming because they're very detailed. Pat asks for the documents to be
rewritten so they're shorter and simpler.
Raja is autistic. Raja needs the work documents to be very detailed.
The team manager talks to all team members. They agree to keep the detailed documents and also provide shorter instructions for the
main tasks.
Reviewing adjustments and keeping a record
Someone's reasonable adjustments might need to change over time. They should talk with their manager regularly to review their
adjustments, and keep a record of what they've asked for and what's been put in place.
Reasonable adjustments in recruitment
Job applicants can ask for reasonable adjustments for any part of the recruitment process. For example, someone might need the
application form in a different format, wheelchair access for an interview, or more time for an interview test.

3. Having a meeting
Employees and employers should work together to agree reasonable adjustments. Having a meeting is a good way to do this.
Preparing for the meeting
Before a meeting about reasonable adjustments, employees might find it helpful to:
think carefully about what they do and do not want to tell their employer
write down notes to refer to during the conversation
practise out aloud, or role-play with someone they trust, to help find the best words to put the points across
Employers should:
agree a time and place for the meeting
share any relevant policies with the employee before the meeting
make sure they're confident talking about reasonable adjustments
put themselves in the employee's position – think about what is going on and what support they might need
write down what they might need to know and think about how to ask about it sensitively
know what the next steps might be and be ready to explain them to the employee
If an employer needs help preparing for a meeting, they could speak to a colleague or someone in HR.
The employer and employee should read any policies the organisation has about reasonable adjustments. These should make clear
what is expected of them.
Thinking about what's possible
To prepare for a conversation about reasonable adjustments, the employer and employee should think about:
what might be possible given the employee's job
what might help the employee manage their health and work
what might the impact of these adjustments be on their ability to do the job to a satisfactory level
what might the impact of these adjustments be to the rest of the team
how to avoid any risks to performance or others in the team
Getting advice from occupational health
An occupational health professional can give advice on what adjustments might be suitable.
Having the conversation and agreeing a plan
The employer and employee should take notes in the meeting to refer to afterwards.

It might be appropriate for the employee to ask someone they work with to join the meeting to take notes.
In the meeting, the employee should explain:
why they're requesting reasonable adjustments
which reasonable adjustments they want to make
The employer should:
check how the employee is
explain that the meeting is talk about how to help the employee stay well at work
explain that some things might be possible, but others might not
explain what the organisation policy is on reasonable adjustments
ask the employee what reasonable adjustments they would like and why they think these will be helpful
suggest any reasonable adjustments they think might be appropriate
share what ongoing support is available
Together, the employer and employee should:
discuss how the reasonable adjustments could work in practice
agree the reasonable adjustments to try
agree a plan to review and monitor the reasonable adjustments

4. Failing to make adjustments
If an employer does not make reasonable adjustments for someone at work or a job applicant, it could be a type of disability
discrimination. This type of disability discrimination is called 'failure to make reasonable adjustments'.
It might be that the employer believes a suggested adjustment is not reasonable.
In this case, the employer should:
talk with the disabled person
explain their decision
try to find another way to support them, for example making other adjustments that are reasonable
If someone feels they've been discriminated against
If someone thinks they've been discriminated against, they could make an informal or formal complaint to their employer or potential
employer.
If the problem is not resolved, they could consider making a claim to an employment tribunal.

5. Reviewing and keeping a record
It's important to review reasonable adjustments regularly and keep a record.
Reviewing reasonable adjustments
Someone's reasonable adjustments might need to change over time. For example if:
they're in a new situation – for example they've moved to a new role or they're going through a redundancy process
something changes at work – for example the employer introduces a new way of working, new equipment or a move to a new
workplace
their condition or impairment changes
they're managing a disability that gets worse over time
To make sure the most appropriate adjustments are in place, anyone with reasonable adjustments should talk with their manager
regularly. For example, this could be every 6 months or if something changes.
Use our reasonable adjustments review template
Keeping a record
Anyone asking for reasonable adjustments should consider doing this in writing, for example in an email or letter, as well as talking
with the employer.
Reasonable adjustments passports
The disabled person can use a 'reasonable adjustments passport' to keep a record of:
how their disability affects them at work
the reasonable adjustments they've agreed with their employer
any reasonable adjustments they think they might need in the future
Using a reasonable adjustments passport means that:
the disabled person and their employer can make sure each reasonable adjustment is correct, practical and up to date
if someone's manager changes, they can show their new manager what's been agreed – this saves them having to go through
the same process again
To create a reasonable adjustment passport, you can use or adapt the Health Adjustment Passport on GOV.UK.
If someone has worked in the armed forces, they can use a Service Leavers Adjustments Passport.

6. Mental health adjustments
Mental health includes emotional, psychological and social wellbeing. It affects how someone thinks, feels and behaves.
Mental health problems can:
happen suddenly, because of a specific event in someone's life
build up gradually over time
be hard to spot because everyone has different signs and signals
be hidden because many people find it difficult to talk about their mental health
fluctuate over time which means that an employee's ability to cope with the demands of the job might change
If an employee has a mental health problem, their employer should take it seriously, with the same care as for physical illness.
A mental health problem can be a disability under the Equality Act 2010. If an employee has a disability, their employer must make
reasonable adjustments.
When making reasonable adjustments for mental health, employers should take into account that:
every job is different, so what works in one situation might not work in another
every employee is different, so what works for one employee might not work for another
mental health changes over time, so what works for an employee now might not work in the future
Examples of reasonable adjustments for mental health
Reasonable adjustments are specific to an individual person. They can cover any area of work.
Working hours and patterns
For example:
more frequent, shorter breaks
paid time off for medical appointments
flexible hours
part-time or job share arrangements
Changing someone's role and responsibilities
For example:
reviewing tasks or deadlines to help someone have a reasonable workload while managing their mental health
breaking down work into short term tasks to reduce the complexity of someone's work and to provide structure to the working
day

reviewing someone's responsibilities to reduce those that are more stressful – for example reducing phone calls or customer
facing work
moving someone into a different role or department if their current job has a negative impact on their mental health
Reviewing working relationships and communication styles
For example:
making sure someone is working with trusted people to limit the impact of different working and communication styles
agreeing a preferred communication method to help reduce anxiety – for example by avoiding spontaneous phone calls
Changing the physical working environment
For example:
allowing someone to work from home to manage distractions or engage in activities that allow them to manage their mental
health – for example, so they can take regular breaks without feeling other people are watching them
relocating someone's workspace to a quieter area to reduce sensory demands
providing rest areas away from the main staff area to allow someone to rest away from social demands
providing reserved parking to reduce the stress of commuting
Being flexible with policies
For example:
offering paid time off for someone to attend appointments in work time
being flexible with trigger points for absence so that someone is not disadvantaged by taking absence when they are unwell
offering an extended phased return to support someone to build up hours gradually and continue their recovery
Additional support
For example:
modifying supervision to provide regular check-ins, prioritising work and creating structure in the working day
providing training or coaching to build confidence in skills relevant to the job
providing a buddy or mentor to be a dedicated person who can support with work tasks
Case studies
Read case studies about making reasonable adjustments for mental health
Talking about reasonable adjustments for mental health
Conversations about reasonable adjustments for mental health might come about because:
a manager notices that someone in their team is struggling with their mental health
an employee asks to have a conversation about work adjustments for mental health
an employee speaks to HR or occupational health and they recommend reasonable adjustments for mental health
What an employer should do

As an employer, you should help an employee who requests reasonable adjustments to:
look after their mental health at work
understand what to expect from a meeting about reasonable adjustments
For example, you could:
ask them how they are
make it clear they should look after themselves and focus on managing their mental health
check if they have accessed support available through work – for example mental health support
let them know about any policies that are relevant to reasonable adjustments for mental health
let them know that the organisation will try to support them in accessing reasonable adjustments
explain the reasonable adjustments process and procedures
agree on a reasonable adjustment meeting date
What an employee should do
Someone experiencing mental health problems might not be sure what they need to manage their mental health. They might not know
what adjustments to suggest.
As an employee, there are several things you can think about when deciding what reasonable adjustments will help. This can help you
prepare for a conversation with your employer about reasonable adjustments.
Think about how your mental health affects your work
For example:
Are there times in the day or week that are better or harder, or do you feel the same all the time?
Are there tasks at home or at work that feel possible and easy to do now?
Are there tasks at home or at work that feel unmanageable now?
Think about how work affects your mental health
For example:
Are there some tasks or situations that make you feel good?
Are there some tasks or situations that make you feel anxious, worried or numb?
Talk to a friend or family member
You can talk to a friend or family member to ask them what they see and think. People can find it hard to recognise patterns in their
behaviour, especially when they are experiencing mental health problems.
For example, you could ask:
When am I confident, settled and happy? What am I doing? Who am I with?
When am I unsettled, anxious or withdrawn? What am I doing? Who am I with?
If an employee's mental health problem is not a disability
An employee's mental health problem might not be a disability.

You should still offer support and explore whether adjustments can help. Simple changes to working arrangements or responsibilities
could be enough.
Making adjustments for mental health can:
help employees to stay in work while recovering from or managing a mental health condition
make sure employees are well, safe and productive
create a healthy work culture by building awareness and showing a commitment to good practice
make it more likely that employees will stay at your organisation, reducing recruitment and training costs

7. Adjustments for neurodiversity
When agreeing reasonable adjustments for neurodivergent employees, it's important to consider both:
making the most of someone's strengths
support for things they find more difficult
Some neurodivergent people do not see themselves as disabled. However, being neurodivergent will often amount to a disability under
the Equality Act 2010.
Some well-known types of neurodivergence are ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder), autism, dyslexia and dyspraxia.
Whether an employee needs a diagnosis
An employee does not need a diagnosis to be considered disabled under the Equality Act 2010.
An employer should offer employees support whether or not they have a diagnosis for their neurodivergence. This includes making
reasonable adjustments.
An employer might ask an employee for proof that they have a condition. For example, an NHS letter confirming a diagnosis. However,
an employee:
is not legally required to provide this
might not have any proof they can give
might have their own reasons for not sharing a diagnosis
If an employee does not have a diagnosis
It's common for employees not to have a diagnosis. Reasons for this include that:
they're worried about a negative reaction from others
they do not feel they need to have one
it can take a long time to be diagnosed – there are long NHS waiting times
getting one can be expensive – if an employee decides to use private healthcare because of the long NHS waiting times
Someone can be diagnosed at any stage in their life. Things people can go through as an adult can also make neurodivergent traits
more obvious, leading to a diagnosis. For example, the menopause or having long covid.

Even if they do not have a diagnosis, employees might have neurodivergent characteristics. And this could mean they need support at
work.
It can be emotionally difficult for employees who:
are struggling with a condition but do not have a diagnosis
have recently got a diagnosis
In both circumstances, having the right support at work can be a big help.
Examples of reasonable adjustments
People often experience neurodivergence differently. The strengths and challenges that come with a condition will not be the same for
everyone.
This means that adjustments that suit one neurodivergent person might not help someone else with the same condition.
Employers should listen to the employee when discussing reasonable adjustments and make suggestions where appropriate.
Someone might not know what support will help them. Especially if:
they have recently been diagnosed and are still understanding it themselves
they're not sure whether they have a condition
In these circumstances, employers and employees should work together to try out adjustments and regularly review them.
Employers and employees might be able to get help from occupational health or a GP when deciding what adjustments are suitable.
Concentration
Adjustments that could help an employee to concentrate include:
headphones, ear defenders or earplugs that remove external sensory noises
fidget toys
a standing desk
regular breaks throughout the day
a quiet place to work away from distractions
For example, an employee who has ADHD works in a call centre. They use a standing desk to help them work off energy and improve
focus.
Written communication
Adjustments that could help with written communication include:
software to support with reading or writing – for example, a screen reader or a speech-to-text programme
talking through written information
breaking down instructions into clear steps
using different coloured backgrounds for documents and signs
having extra time to read information and complete tasks

For example, a construction worker is dyslexic and autistic. They ask for safety signs to be printed on a green background. They find
these easier to read and focus on.
Organisation and time management
Adjustments that could help an employee to organise their time include:
regular check-ins on how work is going
planners that visually highlight things like deadlines and appointments
extra reminders
breaking work up into smaller tasks
having extra time to plan out work
For example, an employee working in a garage is dyspraxic and has ADHD. They use a colour-coded wall planner to help them break
down tasks. They have a 10 minute check-in with their boss each morning to go through the plan for the day.
Sensory overload
Sensory overload is when someone feels they cannot cope because their senses are overwhelmed. For example, by loud noises or
strong smells.
Adjustments that could help reduce sensory overload include:
a private, quiet space to go to
changes to dress codes or uniforms – for example, to allow for softer materials or calmer colours
noise-cancelling headphones
computer screen filters to reduce brightness
having early warning of changes at work and extra time to process them
For example, a teaching assistant in a school is autistic. They are told about changes to the curriculum in advance and given time out
of lessons to go over the changes.
Poor balance or co-ordination
Adjustments that could support with poor balance or co-ordination include:
specialist equipment – for example, a different keyboard or mouse that's easier to use
organising spaces carefully – for example, avoiding clutter
signs giving clear directions around the workplace
For example, an employee in an off licence is dyspraxic. They ask for the storeroom to be organised so that nothing is left on the floor.
And shelves are arranged so that everything is easy to get to.
Supporting strengths
Employers should explore with neurodivergent employees how they can use their strengths at work.
For example:
working with clients if someone has strong verbal communication skills
finding opportunities for creative thinking
identifying areas of work that particularly interest an employee

It's good practice to take this approach with all employees. Doing this will also support neurodivergent employees who have not shared
their condition.
Burnout
Neurodivergent employees are more likely to experience 'burnout' at work. Being burnt out means being extremely tired or exhausted,
so you no longer feel able to work.
Burnout can cause increased absence and poor performance. Employers should consider what support can help avoid this. For
example, extra breaks or varying types of work.
Failure to make reasonable adjustments
If an employer does not make reasonable adjustments, this could be disability discrimination. This type of disability discrimination is
called 'failure to make reasonable adjustments'.
Failing to make reasonable adjustments might
damage an employee's relationship with their employer
affect an employee's performance at work
In some circumstances, an employee could feel like they have no choice but to resign. If this is the case, they might consider making a
claim for constructive dismissal.
Mental health support
Neurodivergent employees might experience mental health problems related to their condition.
A lack of support from their employer can make this worse and:
affect their performance at work
lead to increased sickness absence
For example, not being able to wear noise-cancelling headphones could cause anxiety for some employees with ADHD.
Employers should consider how to support an employee with any mental health problems, as well as with their condition. Doing this
can help improve an employee's performance and productivity.

8. Having a policy
As an employer, it's a good idea for your organisation to have a policy that covers reasonable adjustments.
A policy helps make clear:
how and when employees can access reasonable adjustments
how managers can respond and support staff to put reasonable adjustments in place
how you review and monitor reasonable adjustments
what happens if reasonable adjustments are not working for you or your employee
You can also use a policy to train managers on the process and how to follow it consistently.
You should review any policies you have that relate to disability and reasonable adjustments. For example, policies on sickness or
absence. You should make sure they're consistent with your policy on reasonable adjustments.
What else the policy should include
A reasonable adjustment policy might also include:
reference to any physical or mental health or wellbeing strategy
activities to raise awareness of physical disabilities, mental health conditions and neurodivergence
information on the internal support available – for example disability or mental health champions
what external support is available – for example an employee assistance programme (EAP) or occupational health services
manager training and support
If there is no policy
If you do not have a policy covering reasonable adjustments, you must follow the law.
You can also look at how reasonable adjustments have been managed previously. This might help you decide how to manage them
now or in the future.
If you get reasonable adjustment requests regularly, consider creating a policy. It can help you:
deal with them consistently
reduce the risk of legal claims
Reviewing policies
As an employer, you should review policies on reasonable adjustments to make sure they:
are easy to understand and accessible
are clear on what needs to be done by who, how and when
are easy for employees to find
are used consistently by managers
provide opportunities for employees to give feedback on the policy and recommend changes

After reviewing a policy, you might find:
you need to update it
managers or employees need training and support to use the policy effectively