Formal grievance procedure
1 . Step 1: Understanding the options
If an employee has a problem at work it's usually a good idea for them to raise it informally first.
The employer should respond even if the problem's raised informally.
A grievance procedure is a formal way for an employee to raise a problem or complaint to their employer.
The employee can raise a grievance if:
they feel raising it informally has not worked
they do not want it dealt with informally
it's a very serious issue, for example sexual harassment or whistleblowing
Following a formal procedure
When an employee raises a formal grievance, their employer should follow a formal procedure.
Your organisation should have its own grievance procedure. Otherwise you must follow the Acas Code of
Practice on disciplinary and grievance procedures.
If your organisation has its own grievance procedure, it should:
follow the Acas Code, as a minimum
be in writing and easy to find
Use an example grievance procedure
The Acas Code and the law
You must follow a full and fair procedure in line with the Acas Code for any discipline or grievance case. The procedure you've followed
will be taken into account if the case reaches an employment tribunal.
The size of the organisation
Regardless of the size of your organisation, all employers should follow a full and fair grievance procedure as set out in this guide.
They should:
make clear they'll deal with grievances fairly and consistently
investigate to get as much information as possible
allow the employee to bring a relevant person to a grievance meeting
give everyone a chance to have their say before making a decision

take actions and make decisions as soon as they can
allow the employee to appeal against the grievance outcome
The procedure can be adjusted depending on size.
For example, a manager of a small business with one or 2 employees might need to manage the grievance procedure on their own.
The employee should always:
raise the grievance as soon as they can
take any actions expected of them as soon as they can
If there are related grievances
If there are 2 or more related grievances, the employer should:
still follow the formal procedure, for all the grievances
keep information confidential
consider what each employee wants
explain to the employees how it is dealing with the grievances
There is some flexibility in how to run the grievance procedure in these situations. For example, the employer could decide to have a
single meeting to cover all the grievances, if the employees agree.
Each employee still has the right to their own grievance meeting in which employees who are part of the grievance are not present.
Using mediation
You can use mediation at any stage. Mediation involves an independent, impartial person working with both sides to find a solution.
The mediator can be someone from inside or outside your organisation. If they're from outside your organisation, you might need to
pay.
Both sides will need to agree to mediation.
2. Step 2: Raising a grievance
The employee should check their organisation grievance policy to find out:
how to raise a formal grievance
who they should send it to
what the full grievance procedure is

If there is no organisation grievance procedure, the employee should approach their line manager first. If they do not feel comfortable
doing that, they should approach someone else they feel comfortable talking to, for example another manager or someone in HR.
Employees can also talk to their trade union, if they have one, for advice and support.
How an employee can raise a grievance
The employee with the grievance should put it in writing to whoever is most appropriate. This could be their line manager, HR manager
or employer.
Use our grievance letter template
The letter or email should include:
what the grievance is about
any evidence, for example a payslip or employment contract
what they want their employer to do about it
It's a good idea for the employee to be specific where possible, for example 'I would like to be paid on time in future'.
It's also helpful to be realistic.
For example, an employee believes they have not been paid their correct wages because someone in payroll made a one-off mistake.
In this situation it's usually realistic to expect the employer to investigate and amend the payment if necessary. It's not usually realistic
to expect payroll staff to be dismissed.
If employers or employees do not follow a formal procedure
Not following a formal grievance procedure can affect:
people's morale and confidence at work
the outcome, if the employee later makes a claim to an employment tribunal
A tribunal will take into account whether an employee has a genuine reason for not following a formal procedure.
For example, an employee might find it difficult to attend a grievance meeting with someone accused of sexually harassing them.
3. Step 3: Responding to a grievance
Your organisation should have its own formal grievance procedure. This should follow the Acas Code of Practice for disciplinary and
grievance procedures, as a minimum.
If your organisation does not have a formal procedure, you should follow the Acas Code.

Where possible, the person who handles the grievance procedure should have had training.
The Acas Code and the law
You must follow a full and fair procedure in line with the Acas Code for any discipline or grievance case. The procedure you've followed
will be taken into account if the case reaches an employment tribunal.
If anything similar has happened before
To keep things fair an employer should do all of the following:
aim to follow the same fair procedure
gather evidence from all sides
consider all the information
Keeping written records
The employer should keep written records of what takes place during the grievance procedure. This includes:
what the grievance is about
any decisions and actions taken, and why
whether the employee appeals the grievance outcome
Protecting personal information
The employer should keep all personal information confidential.
If the grievance is about someone else at work
Before getting more information and evidence, the employer should:
avoid assuming anything about the grievance or the people involved
be sensitive to the circumstances and needs of the person the grievance is about, as well as the person who raised the
grievance
Deciding on disciplinary action
An employer should not discipline anyone involved in a grievance before getting all the information and evidence they can.
If there are concerns about employees in a grievance case working together while the grievance is looked into, the employer should
consider what else they can do in the short term.
For example, where an employee has said that someone at work is bullying them, the employer could see whether work schedules can
be rearranged temporarily so that the two people do not work together.
If the employer takes this type of action, they should make clear to the employees that it's not a punishment but a temporary change
while they look into the grievance.

Investigating
The employer should investigate the grievance so that they can make a fair decision about the grievance.
If a crime could have occurred
If the grievance could be a criminal matter, for example it's related to an assault, the police might need to be involved.
Employers and employees should use their own judgement about when to involve the police.
Keep talking
It's important for the employer to keep talking confidentially with:
the employee who raised the grievance
anyone else involved in the grievance
Clear, regular and confidential communication can help avoid:
misunderstandings
a drop in work morale
stress or other mental health problems
further action, such as more grievances
legal action later on
Looking after employees' wellbeing and mental health
Going through a grievance procedure can be very stressful for everyone involved. This includes:
the person the grievance is about
the person raising the grievance
Looking out for employees' wellbeing and offering support can help prevent:
absence
mental health problems arising
existing mental health problems getting worse
For example, as well as regular communication, the employer could arrange any meetings in a more private and comfortable location if
this would help an employee.
Grievances about a customer, client or anyone else who does not work for the
organisation
The employer should follow the formal grievance procedure in the same way.

If a grievance is raised while a disciplinary is taking place
The employer can pause the disciplinary procedure and deal with the grievance first. If the disciplinary and grievance cases are
related, the employer can deal with both at the same time.
If a grievance is raised by more than one employee
If more than one person in an organisation has the same grievance, it might be best to raise it collectively.
The employer and employees should follow your organisation's 'collective grievance' policy.
If your organisation does not have this, the employees could:
get more information from their trade union or workplace representative
raise the grievance themselves, for example by agreeing on one person to raise it and communicate for all of them
Using mediation
You can use mediation at any stage.

4. Step 4: The grievance meeting
When an employee raises a formal grievance, the employer should hold a meeting with them. A grievance meeting is sometimes
called a 'hearing'.
The employer should hold the meeting 'without unreasonable delay' – ideally within 5 working days. They should allow employees
enough time to prepare for the meeting.
To keep the procedure fair, the employer should:
consider information or evidence from all sides
see if a similar grievance has happened before and aim to follow the same fair procedure
The employee, employer and any companions should make every effort to attend the meeting on the date set.
Employers should keep a confidential record of:
what's said at the meeting
evidence they've gathered
any decisions or actions taken
Preparing for the meeting
The employer can arrange for someone not involved in the grievance to:
take notes at the meeting
act as a witness to what's said in the meeting, if necessary

They should also:
arrange for an interpreter if the employee has difficulty speaking English
consider whether reasonable adjustments are needed for a disabled employee or anyone they bring with them
The employee can bring any evidence about the grievance, for example relevant emails, to show and discuss at the meeting.
The right to be accompanied
By law, any employee or worker can bring a 'companion' (relevant person) to a grievance meeting. This is known as 'the right to be
accompanied'.
The right to be accompanied applies when the grievance is about an employer breaching a legal or contractual duty. This could include
duties implied into the contract, for example the duty of care.
If the employer is not sure whether the right to be accompanied applies, it's good practice to allow the employee to be accompanied.
The person must choose their companion from one of the following:
a colleague
a workplace trade union representative who's certified by their union to act as a companion
an official employed by a trade union
Under discrimination law, the employer needs to consider a disabled employee's request to bring someone else for additional support,
such as a carer.
It's up to the employer to agree if the person wants to bring anyone else. It can depend on the contract – for example, some
employment contracts might allow for a partner or legal representative.
Requesting a companion
If the employee wants to bring a companion, they should make a 'reasonable request' to their employer.
To make a reasonable request, the employee should:
tell their employer the name of the companion and whether they're a colleague or a trade union representative
give their employer enough notice, so they can make arrangements for the companion to attend the meeting
The companion should also be given enough time to prepare for the meeting, for example to look at any evidence.
What happens in the meeting
The meeting is the chance for the person who raised the grievance to:
explain the grievance
show any evidence they have
It's also the chance for the employer to ask questions, so that they know what steps to take.
What the employer should do
In the meeting the employer should ask the person who raised the grievance to:

provide more information about it
discuss how it could be resolved
The employer should also:
remain impartial
do their best to understand the feelings of the person raising the grievance
take notes or appoint someone else to take them
go through the evidence
consider if they need to investigate further
take care in deciding on any actions – usually the employer will not need to make an immediate decision
sum up the main points at the end
They should give the person who raised the grievance the chance to:
explain their side
express how they feel – they might need to 'let off steam', particularly if the grievance is serious or has lasted a long time
ask questions
show evidence
provide details of any witnesses the employer should contact
What the companion should do
With the permission of the person raising the grievance, the companion is allowed to:
take notes
set out the case of the person raising the grievance
respond for them to any comments or points made at the meeting
talk with them during the meeting
The companion cannot:
answer questions put to the person raising the grievance
prevent anyone else at the meeting from explaining their side of things
Investigating the grievance
The employer might need to take some time to investigate so they can make a fair decision.
If necessary they can set up another grievance meeting once they have found out more information.
At the end of the meeting
The employer should:
give the employee copies of the meeting record and notes taken
ask the employee to confirm the notes are accurate
tell the employee when they will get a decision

The amount of time needed for a decision should be in line with your organisation grievance policy, if there is one.
If there are delays, for example if further investigation is needed, the employer should explain how long the delays will be and why.
The employer can withhold some information in certain circumstances, for example to protect a witness.
Sharing information
Under data protection law (UK GDPR), the employer should get consent from the person who provided information before sharing it.
This might mean the employer needs to make some information anonymous before sharing it.

5. Step 5: Deciding the outcome
After following a fair grievance procedure, the employer should decide on the best outcome based on:
the findings from meetings and investigations
what is fair and reasonable
what their organisation has done in any similar cases before
The employer should tell the employee of the outcome as soon as possible and in writing, for example in a letter or email.
If the grievance involved other people in the organisation and it was upheld, the employer might need to start a disciplinary procedure.
If the employer decides no action is needed
To make sure there is no bad feeling, the employer should talk privately with the employee.
It's a good idea for the employer to keep a note of how they carried out the procedure for future reference.
The employee's right of appeal
The employer should offer the employee the right of appeal.
This is so the employee can raise an appeal if they feel:
the outcome does not resolve the problem
any stage of the grievance procedure was wrong or unfair

6. Step 6: After the grievance
After a grievance procedure has finished, employers might want to give some information about it to individual staff. It's also important
to keep records.
Talking to staff
The grievance outcome and details must remain confidential. However, where appropriate, it can be a good idea for the employer to
talk privately with any staff who were directly involved in the grievance.
Usually this would be to let them know that the process is finished and to remind them not to talk about it with colleagues.
Employers could also tell them about any changes that will be introduced as a result of the process. For example updating a policy or
providing training on a particular topic.
This helps to reduce the bad feeling and gossip which can happen when staff are involved in formal procedures.
Keeping a record
No matter what the outcome, employers should keep a written record of all grievance cases to help with any questions or similar cases
in the future.
In line with data protection law (UK GDPR), records should be:
confidential
only be kept for as long as necessary
If the employee needs to take things further
If the employee feels they've tried everything and their problem is still not resolved, they could in some cases make a claim to an
employment tribunal.
