Employment contracts and the law
1 . What an employment contract is
Employment contracts are legally binding agreements between employers and workers.
They can be agreed:
verbally – through conversations
in writing – for example, a job offer letter or through emails
through conduct – when people's actions show there's an agreement
Some employment contract terms can also come from the law. For example, all employment contracts include the right to be paid at
least the minimum wage.
Employment status
Employment status is someone's legal status at work. It affects:
the employment rights they're entitled to
both theirs and their employer's responsibilities
The terms of a contract can help work out someone's employment status.
Employees
Anyone with the legal status of employee has either a 'contract of employment' or a 'contract of service' with their employer.
Someone is not likely to be an employee if they're:
an agency worker
a casual worker
on a zero-hours contract
By law, there are certain terms that employees are always entitled to. For example, employees have the right to a minimum notice
period if they're dismissed or made redundant.
Workers
Anyone with the legal status of worker has a different kind of contract with their employer. Workers are sometimes referred to as 'limb
(b)' workers. This term comes from the Employment Rights Act 1996.
A limb (b) worker is someone who has a contract to perform work or services personally for someone else. This is different to a
contract of employment.

Workers have some employment rights, but not as many as employees.
The difference between a contract and a written statement
Someone has the right to a 'written statement of employment particulars' if they are:
an employee
a worker – unless they started the job before 6 April 2020
A written statement includes the main terms of someone's employment, for example pay and working hours.
This document is often referred to as the 'employment contract'. But by law, the employment contract is broader than just the written
statement.
For example, an employment contract might also include:
other clauses – for example about keeping sensitive company information confidential
the organisation's code of conduct
policies – for example on social media or data protection (GDPR)
When the employment contract begins
An employment contract begins when someone starts work.
This is the case even if the employer has:
failed to provide the written statement
not put any other parts of the employment contract in writing
The contract might be formed earlier if all the following apply:
the employer set out the terms of the job in a clear and definite way, verbally or in writing
the job offer was unconditional or the person met all the conditions – for example, the employer was satisfied with their
references
someone accepted the job offer verbally or in writing
If there's no written statement
Employers must provide the written statement on or before the first day of work.
Workers and employees should raise the issue with their employer if they've not received the written statement. It's a good idea to do
this informally first by talking with their employer.

2. Written or verbally agreed terms
An employment contract is made up of different types of terms. This includes terms that are:
written down
verbally agreed – in conversations between the employer and worker
Express terms
Some terms will be explicitly agreed. These are called 'express terms'.
Express terms are usually put down in writing. This might be in the 'written statement of employment particulars' or a job offer letter.
Terms that are agreed verbally
Express terms can also be agreed verbally, in conversations between a worker and their employer.
Terms agreed verbally are usually still legally binding. This means that they are still part of the legal contract.
However, some terms must be written down in the written statement. This includes things like pay, working hours and holidays.
In general, it's a good idea to put everything in writing. This helps everyone to understand their rights and responsibilities.
Incorporated terms
Some employment contract terms might be written in other documents. These are called 'incorporated terms'.
They might be found in:
employee handbooks
collective agreements
company policies
Incorporated terms might not have been agreed specifically between an individual worker and their employer. But they are still part of
the employment contract.
3. Implied and imposed terms
An employment contract is made up of different types of terms. Usually these terms will be explicitly agreed by employers and workers.
But the employment contract can also include terms that:
haven't been written down or explicitly agreed – but can be implied into the contract in different ways
come from the law
Implied terms
Some terms can be 'implied' in the employment contract, even if they have not been written down.
Implied terms often fill in gaps where things have not been written down or agreed verbally. But they are still part of the contract.

This could be because they:
are necessary to make the contract work – for example, a delivery driver needing a valid driving license
were too obvious to write down – for example, employees not stealing from their employer
are clear in the conduct of the employer and worker – for example, always being paid on a certain day of the week
have become part of the contract through custom and practice
An implied term cannot contradict a written term.
In general, it's best to write down anything that you intend to be part of the employment contract. This helps to avoid confusion. It will
ensure that everyone understands their rights and responsibilities.
Imposed terms
Some terms are part of the employment contract because they're required by law. These are known as 'imposed terms'.
Imposed terms can come from:
acts of law
judge-made law – decisions made by judges in higher-level courts, like the Employment Appeal Tribunal or the Court of Appeal
Imposed terms that come from acts of law are sometimes known as 'statutory terms'. For example, that workers should be paid at least
the minimum wage.
Employers cannot include anything in a contract that contradicts an imposed term. This is even if they write it down or discuss it
directly with the worker.
Employer and worker duties
There are certain duties that are always part of an employment contract. These are:
duty of care
duty of trust and confidence
duty of fidelity
These duties are a type of imposed term because they come from the law. But they are generally known as 'implied duties'.
4. Custom and practice
Sometimes things that are not written down can become part of an employment contract through 'custom and practice'.
To be implied through custom and practice, something must be:
'notorious' or generally well-known in the business or industry, usually over a long period of time
reasonable
certain
Example of custom and practice
An employer always gives more than the statutory minimum redundancy pay when they make redundancies. This is called enhanced
redundancy pay.
Their written contracts don't say how much redundancy pay they give. But it is well known throughout the organisation that they always
pay the same enhanced redundancy pay. They've done so every time they've made redundancies, over a long period of time.
The right to enhanced redundancy pay might have become part of the contract through custom and practice.
Writing things down
Something cannot become part of the contract through custom and practice if it contradicts a written term.
If an employer does not want something to be part of the contract, it's best to write this down.
For example, a company wants to give bonuses to workers at the end of the year. But they do not want this to become part of the
contract. They should make sure the employment contract includes a written term saying that all bonuses are discretionary.
If there's a disagreement
If a worker is not sure whether something is part of their employment contract, they could raise this with their employer. It's usually best
to raise it informally first. They can do this by talking with their employer.
If there's a disagreement about whether something is part of the employment contract, the worker could raise a grievance. This is
where they make a formal complaint to their employer.
If they've tried these options without success, workers might be able to make a claim to an employment tribunal.
5. Terms restricting a worker's actions
Sometimes employers might include employment contract terms that restrict a worker's actions.
This might include stopping them from:
working for another employer – known as an 'exclusivity clause'
taking specific actions after they leave that are in conflict with their employer's interests – known as a 'restrictive covenant'
Exclusivity clauses
Exclusivity clauses are to stop a worker from either:
working for another employer
working for another employer without consent
If someone's on a zero-hours contract
By law (Employment Rights Act 1996), if someone is on a zero-hours contract, their employer must not:
try to stop them working for another employer by putting an exclusivity clause in their contract
treat them less favourably if they also work for another employer
dismiss them for working for more than one employer – this could be an unfair dismissal

If someone earns below the lower earnings limit
The law banning the use of exclusivity clauses also applies when someone's weekly income is below or equivalent to the lower
earnings limit (LEL).
The government sets the lower earnings limit each tax year. The lower earnings limit for 6 April 2025 to 5 April 2026 is £125 per week.
If you have any questions about the lower earnings limit, contact HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC).
If an employer includes an exclusivity clause that's against the law
The law banning the use of exclusivity clauses still applies even if the employer:
has included an exclusivity clause in the contract
says a worker has broken their contract by working for another employer
This is because an employer cannot enforce a clause that is against the law.
If someone feels that their employer is including a clause that is against the law, it's a good idea to raise this informally first. They can
do this by talking with their employer.
Restrictive covenants
In some circumstances, employers can include a 'restrictive covenant' in an employment contract. They are used in the contracts of
those with the legal status of employee.
Someone is not likely to be an employee if they're:
an agency worker
a casual worker
on a zero-hours contract
Restrictive covenants restrict employee's activities after they leave, to protect the employer's business interests.
Some examples of restrictive covenants include:
'non-competition' – preventing employees from working for a competitor or starting a competing business for a period of time,
or within a certain distance
'non-disclosure' – preventing employees from sharing sensitive or confidential information after they leave
'anti-poaching' – preventing employees from encouraging others to leave with them
'non-solicitation' – preventing former employees from trying to get the business of their previous employer's clients or
customers
An employer will not usually be able to enforce restrictive covenants unless they're clear, specific and time-restricted. Even then, this
area of the law can be complex.
If you're an employer, you should consider getting legal advice before including restrictive covenants in contracts.

6. Flexibility clauses
Sometimes employers include 'flexibility clauses' in contracts. They're often called 'variation clauses'.
These clauses are intended to allow employers to change terms in the contract in certain circumstances. Flexibility clauses can be
general or specific.
For example, a general flexibility clause might say that an employer can change the terms of a contract, depending on the needs of the
business.
A specific flexibility clause might say that an employer can change working hours, but only within the business opening hours.
Employers should make flexibility clauses as clear and specific as possible. This will help to avoid misunderstandings and reduce the
risk of legal claims.
Flexibility clauses are likely to only affect people with the legal status of employee. This is because other employment statuses usually
already have flexibility around their contract.
Someone is not likely to be an employee if they're:
an agency worker
a casual worker
on a zero-hours contract
Using flexibility clauses to change a contract
Employers must only use flexibility clauses to make changes that are reasonable.
The employer might be in breach of the contract if they:
try to make changes that are unreasonable
fail to inform and consult about any proposed change
do not give reasonable notice for changes
This could be the case even if there's a flexibility clause that seems to allow the change.
For example, an employer is deciding whether it's reasonable to use a flexibility clause to change someone's work location. Things
they should consider include whether:
the new location is within a reasonable commuting distance
the employee can drive
there are public transport options available
the employee has any mobility issues
the employee has caring responsibilities that would be impacted by a longer commute
to offset any extra costs from the change in work location
the work location is among the terms and conditions covered by a 'collective agreement' – this is an agreement with a
recognised trade union
there's any risk of discrimination

Adding a flexibility clause to a contract
If an employer would like to introduce a flexibility clause, they would need to change the employment contract.
An employer must follow certain steps when changing employment contracts.
Employees have different options when deciding how to respond if their employer proposes a change to their contract.
