Deductions from pay and wages
1 . Making and checking deductions
When an employee is paid, they should check their payslips for deductions. If they have not been paid the amount they were
expecting, they should talk to their employer first to check what's happened.
This gives the employer the chance to:
explain why a deduction has been made
correct a mistake
When an employer can make deductions
By law (Employment Rights Act 1996), an employer can only make a deduction from someone's wages if:
it's required by law – for example tax
the employment contract specifically allows the deduction
they overpaid the employee by mistake
it's something the employee agreed to in writing beforehand – for example paying a trade union subscription
the employee missed work because they were on strike or taking industrial action
it's a result of a court ordering the employer to make debt payments from an employee's wages to a third party
it's a result of a court ordering an employee to make a payment to their employer – the employee must have agreed in writing
that the employer can make the deduction
the employee and employer have agreed a salary sacrifice arrangement
Deductions must be clearly stated in an employee's payslip.
Salary sacrifice arrangements
A salary sacrifice arrangement is an agreement to reduce an employee's cash pay. This is usually in return for a non-cash benefit. In
this arrangement, an employee usually sacrifices part of their regular salary. An employee may also sacrifice a one-off item, such as a
bonus.
Non-cash benefits that might be available through a salary sacrifice arrangement include:
childcare vouchers
cycle to work schemes
workplace pension contributions
gym memberships
car hire or car lease schemes
workplace nursery memberships

To set up a salary sacrifice arrangement the employer needs to change the terms of the employment contract. Both the employer and
employee must agree to the change.
A salary sacrifice must not take an employee's pay below the National Minimum Wage. The employer must put limits on any agreed
pay reductions to make sure this does not happen.
Salary sacrifice arrangements can sometimes affect the amount of tax and national insurance paid.
What to do before making deductions
Before making deductions that an employee does not expect, an employer should notify the employee as soon as possible.
Check any written agreements to see if a deduction is allowed. For example, an employer can deduct money for training costs from
their employee's wages if it's agreed in the contract or in writing beforehand. If the employer is deducting money for mandatory training
, the deduction must not take the employee's wages below the National Minimum Wage.
What payments can have deductions
An employer can make deductions from someone's wages. This includes their:
monthly, weekly or hourly pay
holiday pay
statutory payments – for example statutory sick pay (SSP) or statutory maternity pay
bonuses or commission
An employer cannot deduct money from payments that are not part of someone's wages. This includes:
loans – for example a pay advance for a season ticket
expenses
pension payments
redundancy pay
Tips
Employers must not make deductions from tips, service charges or gratuities that they have 'control or significant influence' over.
The only exception to this is for usual tax and National Insurance deductions.
Limits to deductions if you work in retail
An employer can only make a deduction to cover any till shortages or stock shortfalls if it's allowed in an employee's contract.
An employer can take a maximum of 10% of someone's weekly or monthly 'gross pay' (pay before tax and National Insurance).
This limit does not apply to someone's final wages if they leave their job.
The employer must let the employee know in writing if they owe them money. They must explain how they'll claim it back before the
next pay day.

The employer must reclaim the money within 12 months of finding the shortage or shortfall.
When a deduction can take wages below the National Minimum Wage
Deductions must not take someone's pay below the National Minimum Wage, unless the deduction is for:
tax or National Insurance
something an employee's done which their contract says they're liable for, such as damage to a vehicle through reckless
driving
repayment of a wage advance or loan
an overpayment made by mistake
buying shares, other securities or share options in the business
accommodation being provided by an employer
something the employee benefits from – for example trade union subscriptions or pension contributions
voluntary training – the employee must have agreed in writing beforehand to pay back the costs
Income Tax and National Insurance deductions
If someone is legally classed as an employee or worker, the employer must:
deduct tax and National Insurance (NI) contributions from their pay
pass these on to HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC)
If an employer is not passing on these contributions, you can contact the HMRC helpline.
People who are self-employed organise paying tax and other deductions themselves.
If you do not agree with a deduction
If an employee disagrees with a deduction, they should first try to raise it with their employer.
If they've not been able to resolve the issue with their employer, they might be able to make a claim to an employment tribunal.
For example, they might be able to make a claim for:
unlawful deduction from wages
breach of contract, if they're no longer employed
How far back you can claim
There are strict time limits for making a claim to an employment tribunal.
If an employer made 1 wrong deduction, the employee has 3 months minus 1 day from the date of the deduction to make a claim to an
employment tribunal.
If several deductions were made, the employee has 3 months minus 1 day from the date of the most recent deduction.

The employee can claim up to 2 years back as long as either of the following apply:
there's less than 3 months between deductions
the deductions are linked – for example, they might be linked if they are caused by the same error

2. Handling overpayments
In most circumstances an employer has the right to claim back money if they've overpaid someone. They should contact the employee
as soon as they're aware of the mistake.
If an employee notices an overpayment in their payslip, they should talk to their employer as soon as possible.
Agree how the money is paid back
An employer should not deduct money from their employee's wages without letting them know.
The employer should talk to the employee first and agree how the money will be paid back.
For example, if the employer recently made a simple overpayment, they could let the employee know that they'll deduct it from their
next wages. They could also agree to pay the money back a different way, for example by bank transfer.
If the overpayment was a large amount or over a long period of time, an employer should:
be flexible and fair claiming the money back
agree a repayment plan – this can help the employee manage their finances
cannot agree a repayment plan
believed you were being paid the correct amount and will struggle to pay the money back
Looking after an employee's wellbeing and mental health
In some situations, an employee might be worried about paying back money. This can be stressful.
It's important that employers consider the wellbeing and mental health of their employees.
Looking out for employees' wellbeing and offering support can help prevent:

absence
mental health problems arising
existing mental health problems getting worse
The employer should share any specialist help available through work. For example, through an employee assistance programme
(EAP).
If someone has left the organisation
If an employee owes money but no longer works for the organisation, the employer should contact them. They should explain why they
think they owe them money and how much.
If the former employee refuses to pay back the money, the employer might be able to make a court claim to get the money back from
them.
