Research Briefing
By Patrick Brione
Protection from Redundancy
26 January 2023
(Pregnancy and Family Leave)
Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
Summary
1 Introduction
2 Background
3 The Bill
4 Parliamentary progress
5 Commentary
Annex
commonslibrary.parliament.uk

Number CBP 9609 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
Image Credits
Pregnant-woman by Greyerbaby / image cropped. Licensed by Pixabay
License / no copyright required.
Disclaimer
The Commons Library does not intend the information in our research
publications and briefings to address the specific circumstances of any
particular individual. We have published it to support the work of MPs. You
should not rely upon it as legal or professional advice, or as a substitute for
it. We do not accept any liability whatsoever for any errors, omissions or
misstatements contained herein. You should consult a suitably qualified
professional if you require specific advice or information. Read our briefing
‘Legal help: where to go and how to pay’ for further information about
sources of legal advice and help. This information is provided subject to the
conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.
Feedback
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly
available briefings is correct at the time of publication. Readers should be
aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated to reflect
subsequent changes.
If you have any comments on our briefings please email
papers@parliament.uk. Please note that authors are not always able to
engage in discussions with members of the public who express opinions
about the content of our research, although we will carefully consider and
correct any factual errors.
You can read our feedback and complaints policy and our editorial policy at
commonslibrary.parliament.uk. If you have general questions about the work
of the House of Commons email hcenquiries@parliament.uk.
2 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
Summary
The Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23 is
a Private Member’s Bill, Bill 15 of the 2022-23 session, introduced on 15 June
2022 by Labour MP Dan Jarvis who came second in the Private Members’ Bill
ballot for the 2022-23 session.
The Bill had its first reading on 15 June 2022 and passed second reading on 21
October 2022. The Bill completed its committee stage on 2 November 2022
without amendment. In both cases MPs from all sides of the House spoke in
favour of the Bill and no opposition was raised, meaning the stages were
passed without division. It is listed for remaining stages on 3 February 2023.
Background
Currently, under Regulation 10 of the Maternity and Paternity Leave
Regulations 1999, a woman on maternity leave whose job is being made
redundant, “is entitled to be offered (before the end of her employment under
her existing contract) alternative employment” with her employer or an
associated employer, in any suitable vacancy available that offers work
appropriate for her and terms not substantially worse than her previous job.
Other regulations extend similar protections to those on adoption leave and
shared parental leave.
Since 2015, the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC), Women and
Equalities Committee and campaign groups such as Pregnant Then Screwed
have conducted investigations into the experiences of new mothers facing
redundancy. The EHRC found that “around 54,000 new mothers may be
forced out of their jobs in Britain each year”, while a survey of new mothers by
Pregnant Then Screwed found “that 30% believed they had experienced
discrimination from their employer during the pandemic”.
The Government pledged to bring forward measures in response to some of
these findings and in January 2019 the Department for Business, Energy &
Industrial Strategy launched a consultation on Pregnancy and maternity
discrimination: extending redundancy protection for women and new parents.
In response to the consultation, the Government pledged to extend current
redundancy protections from the moment the employer was informed of the
pregnancy through to six months after maternity leave has finished, as well as
extending equivalent protections to those taking adoption leave or shared
parental leave.
4 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
These measures were included in an outline of a proposed Employment Bill in
the December 2019 Queen’s Speech. However, the Employment Bill was not
ultimately introduced in the 2019-21 session and did not reappear in the 2021
or 2022 Queen’s Speeches.
Between 2019 and 2021 Conservative MP Maria Miller introduced three Private
Member’s Bills aiming to prohibit redundancy during pregnancy, maternity
leave and up to six months after, other than for a limited set of reasons. None
of the Bills received a second reading.
What does the Bill do?
This Bill would give the Secretary of State the power, by regulations, to extend
the Regulation 10 protections against redundancy, currently offered to
women on maternity leave, to cover a longer period of time during, or after, a
period of pregnancy. The Bill would also give the Secretary of State the power
to make regulations to expand equivalent protections for those on adoption
leave or shared parental leave to extend after those periods of leave have
concluded.
More specifically, current provisions in the Employment Rights Act 1996 allow
the Secretary of State to make regulations which make provision about
redundancy “during” periods of maternity leave, adoption leave or shared
parental leave. This Bill would amend those respective provisions to allow
regulations to make provision about redundancy “during or after” such
periods of leave, as well as adding a new provision to the 1996 Act allowing
for regulations about redundancy “during, or after” a “protected period of
pregnancy”.
The Bill itself would not specify the details of any protections that such future
regulations could set out.
5 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
1 Introduction
The Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23,
Bill 15 of the 2022-23 session, was introduced on 15 June 2022 by Labour MP
Dan Jarvis as a Private Member’s Bill, presented to Parliament through the
ballot procedure.
The Bill extends to England, Wales and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland
where employment law is devolved.
The explanatory notes for the Bill were drafted by the Department for
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy.
The Bill would take effect two months from the day it was passed. It would not
provide a timeframe within which the Secretary of State must make any
regulations providing for the detail of the new redundancy protections.
The explanatory notes suggest that the financial implications of the Bill would
include a “small Exchequer cost resulting from additional Statutory Maternity
Pay estimated to be £17.1m”, mostly offset by “the benefit of not having to pay
Maternity Allowance [of] £15.1m.” A money resolution was therefore requried,
which was approved on 31 October 2022. The notes also suggest that the one
off cost to business of adjsusting to the new legislation will be £30.4 million,
followed by an annual cost in contributions to Statutory Maternity Pay of £0.9
million.1
1 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23, Explanatory Notes, Para
24-26
6 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
2 Background
2.1 Current legal protections
Currently, under Regulation 10 of the Maternity and Paternity Leave
Regulations 1999, a woman on maternity leave whose job is being made
redundant, “is entitled to be offered (before the end of her employment under
her existing contract) alternative employment” with her employer or an
associated employer, in any suitable vacancy available that offers work
appropriate for her and terms not substantially worse than her previous job.
Regulation 23 of the Paternity and Adoption Leave Regulations 2002 and
Regulation 39 of the Shared Parental Leave Regulations 2014 currently
provide the same protections to those on adoption leave or shared parental
leave respectively.
Regulation 10 of the Maternity and Paternity Leave Regulations 1999 is made
under powers granted by section 74(1) of the Employment Rights Act 1996,
which empowers the Secretary of State to make regulations which “make
provision about redundancy during an ordinary or additional maternity leave
period.” Equivalent sections of the 1996 Act allow for the regulations which
grant such protections “during” periods of adoption leave and shared
parental leave.
2.2 Research and campaigns
EHRC
In 2015 the Equality and Human Rights Commission published research which
estimated that “around 54,000 new mothers may be forced out of their jobs in
Britain each year”. This was based on 11% of 3,200 women surveyed by the
EHRC reporting “having been dismissed, made compulsorily redundant where
others in their workplace were not, or treated so poorly they felt they had to
leave their jobs”.2
2 “Pregnancy and maternity discrimination forces thousands of new mothers out of their jobs”,
Equality and Human Rights Commission, 24 July 2015
7 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
Women and Equalities Committee
In 2016, the Women and Equalities Committee conducted an inquiry into
pregnancy and maternity discrimination. The inquiry found that “pregnant
women and mothers report more discrimination and poor treatment at work
now than they did a decade ago… the Government must make changes in
laws and protections… to prevent discriminatory redundancies.” The inquiry
included in its recommendations that protections from redundancy be
extended:
We are persuaded that additional protection from redundancy for new and
expectant mothers is required. The Government should implement a system
similar to that used in Germany under which such women can be made
redundant only in specified circumstances. This protection should apply
throughout pregnancy and maternity leave and for six months afterwards. The
Government should implement this change within the next two years.3
In 2017, in their response to the Committee, the Government indicated that
the current situation outlined by the EHRC research was “clearly
unacceptable” and that they would “consider further and bring forward
proposals to ensure that the protections in place for those who are pregnant
or returning from maternity leave are sufficient.” However, the Government
did not commit to adopting the committee’s recommended German-style
system of restricting reasons for redundancy, in place of the current UK
approach based around prioritising the offer of alternative vacancies in cases
of redundancy.4
Pregnant Then Screwed
In July 2020 campaign group Pregnant Then Screwed surveyed 19,950 women
and found that “11.2% of women on maternity leave have been made
redundant or expect to be made redundant”, of whom “60.7% believe their
maternity leave was a factor in the decision”.5
In April 2021 another survey of 16,000 women found that “30% of mothers
have experienced discrimination from an employer.” In January 2022 a survey
of 6,906 pregnant women and new mothers found that 8.4% reported
discrimination at work had caused them stress during or after their
pregnancy, and 3.2% had suffered stress as a result of job loss.6
3 Pregnancy and maternity discrimination, Women and Equalities Committee inquiry, 4 August 2016,
Para. 70
4 Government response to the House of Commons Women and Equalities Committee report on
pregnancy and maternity discrimination, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy,
January 2017
5 “Press Releases – 46% of COVID-19 redundant mothers blame lack of childcare”, Pregnant Then
Screwed, 23 July 2020 [accessed 24 August 2022]
6 “Pregnant Then Screwed launch mental health support line to tackle the mental health impacts of
discrimination at work”, Pregnant Then Screwed, 4 August 2022 [accessed 24 August 2022]
8 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
2.3 2019 consultation
In January 2019 the Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy
launched a consultation on Pregnancy and maternity discrimination:
extending redundancy protection for women and new parents.7 The
consultation ran from 25 January to 5 April 2019. The majority of responses on
the proposals to extend redundancy protection agreed:
• that 6 months would be an adequate period of “return to work” for
redundancy protection purposes
• that protection should be extended to parents who have taken adoption
leave and shared parental leave8
The Government responded to the consultation on 22 July 2019. The response
included a series of commitments to increase redundancy protections in this
area, including to:
• ensure the redundancy protection period applies from the point the
employee informs the employer that she is pregnant, whether orally or in
writing;
• extend the redundancy protection period for six months once a new
mother has returned to work. We expect that this period will start
immediately once maternity leave is finished;
• extend redundancy protection into a period of return to work for those
taking adoption leave following the same approach as the extended
protection being provided for those returning from maternity leave – it
will be for six months;
• extend redundancy protection into a period of return to work for those
taking shared parental leave, taking account of the following key
principles and issues:
– the key objective of this policy is to help protect pregnant women
and new mothers from discrimination;
– the practical and legal differences between shared parental leave
and maternity leave mean that it will require a different approach;
– the period of extended protection should be proportionate to the
amount of leave and the threat of discrimination;
– a mother should be no worse off if she curtails her maternity leave
and then takes period of Shared Parental Leave;
– the solution should not create any disincentives to take Shared
Parental Leave;9
7 Pregnancy and maternity discrimination: extending redundancy protection for women and new
parents, Department of Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, 25 January 2019
8 As above
9 Pregnancy and maternity discrimination: Extending redundancy protection for women and new
parents: Government response, Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, July 2019, p6
9 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
2.4 Employment Bill
The Queen’s Speech in December 2019 included an Employment Bill which
included, among other measures, “Extending redundancy protections to
prevent pregnancy and maternity discrimination.”10 The Employment Bill was
not ultimately introduced in the 2019-21 session and did not reappear in the
2021 or 2022 Queen’s Speeches.1112
To date the Government has not introduced any legislation to implement this
commitment. In oral evidence before the BEIS Select Committee on 13
December 2022, Business Secretary Grant Shapps suggested that, given a
series of Private Members’ Bills including this one, there was no longer any
need for a Government Employment Bill, saying:
We have had five separate Bills, which the Department has helped sponsor
through Back Benchers. I do not think we have an Employment Bill on the cards
per se.13
2.5 Pregnancy and Maternity (Redundancy
Protection) Bills
In June 2021, Conservative MP Maria Miller introduced a Private Member’s Bill,
the Pregnancy and Maternity (Redundancy Protection) Bill 2021-22, which
sought to “prohibit redundancy during pregnancy and maternity leave and for
six months after the end of the pregnancy or leave, except in specified
circumstances; and for connected purposes.” The Bill did not receive a second
reading and fell at the end of the 2021-22 session.
This was the most recent of three attempts by Maria Miller MP to introduce a
Bill on this issue; the other Private Members’ Bills being the Pregnancy and
Maternity (Redundancy Protection) Bill 2017-19, introduced in May 2019 and
the Pregnancy and Maternity (Redundancy Protection) Bill 2019-21, introduced
in July 2020, both introduced under the Ten Minute Rule and neither of which
received a second reading.
10 Prime Minister’s Office, The Queen’s Speech 2019: Background briefing notes, 19 December 2019
11 HM Government, Queen’s Speech 2021, 11 May 2021
12 HM Government, Queen’s Speech 2022, 10 May 2022
13 BEIS Select Committee, Oral evidence: The work of the Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
Department, HC 529, 13 December 2022, Q145
10 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
2.6 Westminster Hall debate April 2021
On 28 April 2021 there was a Westminster Hall debate on Redundancy
Protection: Women and New Parents, sponsored by SNP MP Kirsten Oswald.
Kirsten Oswald, in opening the debate, highlighted the EHRC and Pregnant
Then Screwed research discussed above and noted that the Taylor Review into
modern working practices had found that “at least one in 10 employers, and
possibly as many as one in five, are not willing to support pregnant women
and new mothers”, with at least a third of employers interviewed endorsing
the views that “During recruitment, women should have to disclose whether
they are pregnant” and that “Women should work for an organisation for at
least a year before deciding to have children”. 14
She criticised the lack of Government action in bringing forward an
Employment Bill and expressed SNP support for Maria Miller’s Pregnancy and
Maternity (Redundancy Protection) Bill.
Responding for the Government, then Labour Markets Minister Paul Scully
acknowledged a need for reform, saying:
I will not hide from the fact that there is a real issue here. The research that we
jointly funded with EHRC has been cited and makes for uncomfortable
reading.15
Minister Scully reiterated Government commitments from their response to
the 2019 consultation, to extend redundancy protection periods from the
point the employee informs the employer that she is pregnant, to six months
after a new mother has returned to work, as well as extending protections for
those returning from adoption leave and shared parental leave. He added
that “We have been clear that we will introduce these measures as soon as
parliamentary time allows.”16
Commenting on the SNP support for Maria Miller’s Private Member’s Bill,
which would have banned redundancy of new mothers outright in many
cases, Minister Scully said that the Government preferred to expand the
current general approach rather than take this alternative direction:
It is not the objective that we disagree on but the means of achieving it, and
even then we share a lot of common ground. The key difference is that the
Government’s preferred approach retains and extends the current position of
giving the pregnant woman or new parent preferential treatment so that, in
effect, they are first in the queue for suitable remaining jobs in a redundancy
situation. Others suggest removing the current framework and replacing it
with a comprehensive redundancy band with some very limited exceptions so
that, in effect, that a pregnant woman or new mother could only be made
14 HC Deb, 28 April 2021, c131WH-132WH
15 HC Deb 28 April 2021, c136WH
16 HC Deb 28 April 2021, c138WH
11 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
redundant when a business is closing down. The Government have not yet been
convinced by that argument.
At its simplest, taking that approach could require employers to continue to
employ people even when there is no work for them to do if the business
continued to exist. That burden would fall particularly heavily on small
businesses. That is why we continue to believe that extending the existing
framework remains the right approach.17
17 HC Deb 28 April 2021, c137WH
12 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
3 The Bill
3.1 Clause 1: Redundancy during a protected
period of pregnancy
Clause 1 would insert new clause 49D into the Employment Rights Act 1996.
This new clause would allow the Secretary of State, via regulations, to
introduce rules about how redundancies are to be handled during, or after, a
“protected period of pregnancy”, a period to be calculated in accordance
with future regulations made by the Secretary of State.
These new regulations could require employers to offer alternative
employment in cases of redundancy, with failure to do so being considered
unfair dismissal. This would mirror protections currently granted to people on
maternity leave by Regulation 10 of the Maternity and Paternity Leave
Regulations 1999, extending these protections to those who are pregnant or
were recently pregnant even if not on maternity leave.
Clause 1 would also make further amendments to the 1996 Act to ensure any
such protections applied to those in Crown employment, the armed forces,
members of House of Lords or House of Commons staff and certain groups of
mariners.
Regulations made by statutory instrument under this clause would be subject
to the affirmative procedure.
3.2 Clause 2: Maternity, adoption and shared
parental leave: redundancy
Clause 2 would make amendments to sections 74, 75C and 75J of the
Employment Rights Act 1996.
Section 74 of the 1996 Act currently allows regulations to be made about
redundancy “during” maternity leave – the power used to make Regulation 10
of the Maternity and Paternity Leave Regulations 1999. The amendment would
allow regulations to be made about redundancy “during, or after” maternity
leave.
Section 75C of the 1996 Act currently allows regulations to be made about
redundancy “during” adoption leave – the power used to make Regulation 23
13 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
of the Paternity and Adoption Leave Regulations 2002. The amendment would
allow regulations to be made about redundancy “during, or after” adoption
leave.
Section 75J of the 1996 Act currently allows regulations to be made about
redundancy “during” shared parental leave – the power used to make
Regulation 39 of the Shared Parental Leave Regulations 2014. The
amendment would allow regulations to be made about redundancy “during,
or after” shared parental leave.
Regulations made under the amended sections of the 1996 Act would
continue to be made using the affirmative procedure, as is currently the case.
3.3 Clause 3: Extent, commencement and short
title
Clause 3 sets out that the Bill would come into force two months from the day
it was passed.
The Bill would extend to England, Wales and Scotland but not to Northern
Ireland where employment law is devolved.
If passed the Bill would be known as the Protection from Redundancy
(Pregnancy and Family Leave) Act 2022.
14 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
4 Parliamentary progress
First reading of the Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family
Leave) Bill was on 15 June 2022. The long title of the Bill is:
A Bill to make provision about protection from redundancy during or after
pregnancy or after periods of maternity, adoption or shared parental leave.
The Bill passed second reading on 21 October 2022 and completed its
committee state on 2 November 2022 without amendment. It is listed for
remaining states on 3 February 2023.
4.1 Second reading debate
The Bill received its second reading on Friday 21 October 2022. It was passed
without division and all members who spoke, from both sides of the House,
were supportive of the principles of the Bill. The Bill’s sponsor, Dan Jarvis,
explained the purpose of the Bill as being to increase security in the
workplace for pregnant women and new parents, saying:
The current safeguards afforded under the Equality Act 2010 and the Maternity
and Parental Leave etc. Regulations 1999—the MAPLE regulations—are not
being applied correctly, and are sometimes not being observed at all. As it
stands under the law, a woman on maternity leave is entitled to be offered a
suitable alternative vacancy if her role is at risk, but a lack of clarity coupled
with poor compliance means that new mums are often first rather than last to
be shown the door. The sheer scale of the problem makes the case for reform
irrefutable.18
Dan Jarvis also addressed those who wanted to go further and adopt “an
outright ban on redundancies, as we have seen implemented in Germany”. He
noted that such a ban would also be his preference, but that the UK
Government had decided not to support such measures and that the current
Bill represented “a reasonable and sensible compromise”, a view which was
accepted by others speaking in the debate.19
A few Labour MPs expressed disappointment that these measures had to wait
to come through a Private Members’ Bill rather than Government legislation.
Shadow Minister for Employment Rights Imran Hussain also raised a number
of other concerns, including the need for the Government to raise awareness
of the law among employers, the qualifying period needed to be eligible for
18 HC Deb, 21 October 2022 c948
19 HC Deb, 21 October 2022 c950
15 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
the additional protections and the need for the Secretary of State to make
regulations to bring the new protections into effect, without anything in the
Bill “complelling him to introduce these regulations by a certain date”.20
Responding for the Government, then Enterprise and Markets Minister Dean
Russell confirmed that the Government would support the Bill, saying:
In conclusion, these measures will provide invaluable support and protection
for parents during what should be an exciting and joyous time—pregnancy
and the start of their child’s life—as they juggle work and caring
responsibilities. The extension of MAPLE to pregnancy in a period of return to
work is backed by evidence and analysis. The Government’s and the EHRC’s
research, and the work of the Women and Equalities Committee and others,
have established that there is a clear need for further work to help parents at
these times. We must take steps to tackle the discrimination and poor
treatment that some undoubtedly face.
The Government are pleased to support the Bill. It is wholly in line with our
ongoing commitment to support workers and build a high-skilled, highproductivity, high-wage economy.21
In response to the points raised by MPs who wanted to go beyond these
measures to adopt the German model, the Minister said they did not think the
time was right to do so, saying:
The hon. Member for Barnsley Central and others mentioned the German
model. I am conscious that there is always a question whether we can push
further and faster and do more. I definitely take his comments on board, but
the Government do not think that it is right to follow the German model; I will
happily follow up separately with specific details about why we do not agree
with going that far. However, there is merit in how the Bill takes definite strides
in that direction.22
Money resolution
A Money resolution required for the Bill was approved on 31 October 2022.23
4.2 Committee stage
On 2 November 2022 the Bill was considered by a Public Bill Committee
chaired by Conservative MP Philip Hollobone. See the Annex to this paper for
the full membership. No amendments were tabled.
The Bill’s sponsor, Labour MP Dan Jarvis, explained the purpose and function
of the two main clauses of the Bill, saying:
20 HC Deb, 21 October 2022 cc983-984
21 HC Deb, 21 October 2022 c989
22 HC Deb, 21 October 2022 c988
23 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill: Stages, bills.parliament.uk
16 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
Clause 1 allows the Secretary of State to make regulations on redundancy
during the period of pregnancy. The regulations can include provisions that
require the employer to offer alternative employment. They will also permit an
employee to declare that they are pregnant after the pregnancy has ended.
That is to allow, for example, a woman who had miscarried before telling her
employer about the pregnancy access to the redundancy protection that she
would otherwise have had. I therefore propose that clause 1 stand part of the
Bill.
Clause 2 allows the Secretary of State to make regulations on redundancy
during or after the relevant periods of leave. It does so by amending his
existing powers so that he can make regulations on redundancy during or after
maternity adoption and shared parental leave. Again, I propose that the
clause stand part of the Bill.24
In his opening remarks Dan Jarvis also raised an issue with the Minister
concerning a proposed need for parents to take at least six weeks of leave to
qualify for additional redundancy protections:25
I want to raise just one issue with the Minister, which relates to the six-week
qualifying period and about which I wrote to two of his predecessors. Although
these measures will not be in the Bill, they are important. Currently, there is
within the regulations a qualifying period, whereby a new parent must take six
consecutive weeks of family leave to be entitled to the redundancy protections.
I know that the threshold is in place to try to ensure that the protections are
proportionate and to avoid a scenario whereby a partner who takes one week
of shared parental leave is not afforded the same protection as a woman who
takes 12 months of maternity leave. However, I share the concerns that that
could disproportionately impact a new mother who is forced to curtail her
maternity leave for whatever reason, returning to work unprotected and
vulnerable.
I have been assured that a consultation is being carried out with the Pregnancy
and Maternity Discrimination Advisory Board, and I am pleased that the
Government are consulting stakeholders before a final decision is taken. The
Minister does not need to respond today, but I ask him to give good
consideration to the board’s proposals. I am hopeful that when it reconvenes
later in the autumn consensus will be reached, and we will be able to protect
as many new mothers as possible with the legislation.26
Labour MP Imran Hussain spoke in favour of the Bill and reiterated the point
about the proposed six week qualifying period, as well as urging the
Government to move quickly in introducting the regulations to be made under
the Bill:
As we go through the clauses of the Bill, we must remember that it extends no
additional protections to working parents; the real work is to be done in the
regulations mandated by the Bill. To that end, as I pressed the Government on
24 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill Deb, 2 November 2022, c5
25 This refers to a reported proposal, referred to in the Maternity Action Parliamentary briefing,
January 2023, which states: “Since October, it has emerged that Ministers propose to include, in the
necessary Regulations, a six-week qualifying period for the protection that would be extended to
new parents after their return to work from a period of leave. However, this proposal – which would
set a worrying policy precedent – has not been publicly set out in writing”
26 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill Deb, 2 November 2022, c4
17 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
Second Reading, I urge the Minister to commit to those regulations being
introduced as soon as possible. The urgent necessity of that is not lost on
anyone here today, and I refer to the comments made by my hon. Friend the
Member for Barnsley Central. I urge the Minister to guarantee that we see
something by the end of the financial year at the latest.27
Responding for the Government, Minister for Enterprise, Markets and Small
Business, Kevin Hollinrake, reaffirmed the Governments’ support for the Bill
saying it “will bring important added redudancy protections for pregnant
women and new parents on their return to work”.28
In response to the question raised about the speed of introducing the
regulations, the Minister agreed on the need for moving as quickly as
possible, but also stated the need to ensure proper consultation with
stakeholders, saying:
I absolutely agree with the shadow Minister, the hon. Member for Bradford
East, about implementing the measures as quickly as possible, but I want to
make sure that we get them right, and we are working with the Pregnancy and
Maternity Discrimination Advisory Board and consulting other stakeholders to
ensure that we do.29
In response to the question raised about the proposed six week qualifying
period, the Minister responded explaining why it was not the Government’s
intention to change that, saying:
The hon. Member for Barnsley Central referred to the issue of the six-week
qualification period. We want to avoid a situation where after 12 months
someone who has taken a few weeks of shared parental leave receives the
same redundancy protection as a mother who has just returned from 12
months of maternity leave. That is what we are trying to get right.30
Conservative MP Bob Stewart made a brief intervention to suggest that the
Government require employers to hand a piece of paper with a statement of
their rights to any pregnant employees. The Minister noted this was an
interesting point and that “I’m sure my officials have heard what he has said
and will think about it when it comes to forming these specific regulations.”31
It was proposed and agreed that all clauses stand part of the Bill, which was
accordingly to be reported without amendment.32
The remaining stages are listed for Friday 3 February 2023.
27 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill Deb, 2 November 2022, c6
28 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill Deb, 2 November 2022, c7
29 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill Deb, 2 November 2022, c7
30 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill Deb, 2 November 2022, c6
31 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill Deb, 2 November 2022, c8
32 Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill Deb, 2 November 2022, c10
18 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
5 Commentary
5.1 Political commentary
In a short video statement outside Parliament after introducing the Bill, Dan
Jarvis MP described his motivations for introducing the Bill and his hopes that
it would prevent new mothers from losing their jobs:
Around 54,000 women a year lose their jobs because they’re pregnant, while 3
in 4 working mums experience maternity discrimination. No one should be
penalised for having a family, but pregnant women and new mums too often
are. It’s scandalous.
That’s why today in Parliament I introduced my Protection from Redundancy
(Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill. My Bill would change the law and prevent
employers from automatically laying off new mothers, by extending
redundancy protections. It will protect women returning to work but also cover
the period of pregnancy, shared parental leave and adoption leave.
We all know balancing family life is hard enough. The very last thing parentsto-be and new mums need is to be getting forced out of the door by their
employer. My bill is a step towards providing working families with security
and dignity in the workplace and it already has cross-party support. I hope it
will soon pass into law and make a real difference.33
Shadow Secretary of State for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
Jonathan Reynolds commented in response that “This is a good proposal from
@DanJarvisMP and I look forward to the Bill being introduced.”34
It was reported in the i newspaper that then Secretary of State for Business,
Energy and Industrial Strategy Kwasi Kwarteng “has given his initial backing
to proposals to strengthen the employment rights of pregnant women and
workers returning from parental leave by extending the period in which they
are protected from redundancy.” The article stated that the Bill enjoys
Government support, saying “A Government source told i Mr Kwarteng
supports it in principle, following meetings between his department and Mr
Jarvis.”35
33 Dan Jarvis (@DanJarvisMP). (Twitter) 15 June 2022 [accessed 23 August 2022]. Available from:
https://twitter.com/DanJarvisMP/status/1537066944376995843
34 Jonathan Reynolds (@jreynoldsMP). (Twitter) 15 June 2022 [accessed 23 August 2022]. Available
from: https://twitter.com/jreynoldsMP/status/1537098471064457216
35 Arj Singh, “Kwasi Kwarteng poised to back changing law to stop new mothers losing their jobs for
having a child”, i, inews.co.uk, 14 June 2022 [accessed 23 August 2022]
19 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
5.2 Other commentary
Fawcett Society
Women’s rights charity The Fawcett Society stated that they support the Bill,
alongside a selection of other Private Member’s Bills presented on the same
day, and that the charity “will be campaigning with our members and allies to
ensure [these Bills] are given the space they need to become law”. They noted
that this Bill “will extend redundancy protections for new mothers so that new
mums have greater protections when they return to work.”
CEO Jemima Olchawski commented that this Bill, among others, goes some
way to making up for the lack of Government action on women’s rights,
saying:
We were disappointed at the lack of progress on women’s rights in the Queen’s
Speech, but the wide range of private member ballot bills announced today
that will advance the rights of women and girls show that our collective voices
are being heard – and MPs are listening.36
Maternity Action
In August 2022, maternity rights charity Maternity Action issued a
parliamentary briefing on the Bill [PDF], which states that “Maternity Action
does not support the Bill, which we fear would simply entrench a broken
system that we know does not work and does not protect women.”37 The
charity is critical of the current approach defined by Regulation 10 of the
Maternity and Paternity Leave Regulations 1999 that this Bill seeks to extend.
Maternity Action argues that the protections offered by Regulation 10, giving
women on maternity leave priority for appropriate vacancies in case of
redundancy, “is little more than a mirage”:
with employers able to ignore or act in deliberate breach of the law, safe in the
knowledge that, having just given birth or been away from the workplace for
up to a year, a woman is most unlikely to bring a prohibitively expensive
Employment Tribunal claim – the only means of challenging an unfair
redundancy.38
Maternity Action references their previous report Unfair Redundancies, which
noted the difficulty of proving tribunal claims under Regulation 10.39 Instead,
the charity calls for more fundamental reform:
36 “Fawcett welcomes announcements on Private Members’ Bills to advance gender equality”, The
Fawcett Society, 15 June 2022
37 Parliamentary briefing: Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy & Family Leave) Bill [PDF],
Maternity Action, August 2022
38 As above
39 Unfair Redundancies: During pregnancy, maternity leave and return to work [PDF], Maternity
Action, October 2017
20 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
namely the introduction of a legal ban on making a pregnant woman or new
mother redundant, other than in very limited and clearly specified
circumstances, such as closure of all or part of a workplace.40
Maternity Action reference their support for previous unsuccessful Private
Member’s Bills, Maria Miller MP’s Pregnancy and Maternity (Redundancy
Protection) Bills (see above), which similarly aimed for a more general ban on
redundancies for pregnant women or new mothers.
Maternity Action issued an updated parliamentary briefing [PDF] in January
2023 following the second reading and committee stages, reiterating their
concerns about the Bill.41
40 Parliamentary briefing: Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy & Family Leave) Bill [PDF],
Maternity Action, August 2022, p2
41 Parliamentary briefing: Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy & Family Leave) Bill [PDF],
Maternity Action, January 2023
21 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
Annex
Composition of Public Bill Committee,
Wednesday 2 November 2022
Chair: Mr Philip Hollobone
† Aiken, Nickie (Cities of London and Westminster) (Con)
Anderson, Lee (Ashfield) (Con)
† Bailey, Shaun (West Bromwich West) (Con)
Baillie, Siobhan (Stroud) (Con)
† Barker, Paula (Liverpool, Wavertree) (Lab)
† Efford, Clive (Eltham) (Lab)
† Evans, Dr Luke (Bosworth) (Con)
† Farris, Laura (Newbury) (Con)
† Hollinrake, Kevin (Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Business,
Energy and Industrial Strategy)
† Hunt, Jane (Loughborough) (Con)
† Hussain, Imran (Bradford East) (Lab)
† Jarvis, Dan (Barnsley Central) (Lab)
† Morgan, Helen (North Shropshire) (LD)
† Smith, Cat (Lancaster and Fleetwood) (Lab)
† Stewart, Bob (Beckenham) (Con)
† Stone, Jamie (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)
† Sturdy, Julian (York Outer) (Con)
Anne-Marie Griffiths, Committee Clerk
22 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

Protection from Redundancy (Pregnancy and Family Leave) Bill 2022-23: Progress of the Bill
† attended the Committee
23 Commons Library Research Briefing, 26 January 2023

The House of Commons Library is a research and
information service based in the UK Parliament.
Our impartial analysis, statistical research and
resources help MPs and their staff scrutinise
legislation, develop policy, and support constituents.
Our published material is available to everyone
on commonslibrary.parliament.uk.
Get our latest research delivered straight to your inbox.
Subscribe at commonslibrary.parliament.uk/subscribe
or scan the code below:
commonslibrary.parliament.uk
@commonslibrary