Research Briefing
9 December 2024
Legal advice and help in
By Patrick Brione
employment matters
Summary
1 Introduction
2 Funding and time limits
3 Sources of employment rights advice
4 Representation in employment tribunals
commonslibrary.parliament.uk

Number CBP-02830 Legal advice and help in employment matters
Disclaimer
The Commons Library does not intend the information in our research
publications and briefings to address the specific circumstances of any
particular individual. We have published it to support the work of MPs. You
should not rely upon it as legal or professional advice, or as a substitute for
it. We do not accept any liability whatsoever for any errors, omissions or
misstatements contained herein. You should consult a suitably qualified
professional if you require specific advice or information. Read our briefing
‘Legal help: where to go and how to pay’ for further information about
sources of legal advice and help. This information is provided subject to the
conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.
Sources and subscriptions for MPs and staff
We try to use sources in our research that everyone can access, but
sometimes only information that exists behind a paywall or via a subscription
is available. We provide access to many online subscriptions to MPs and
parliamentary staff, please contact hoclibraryonline@parliament.uk or visit
commonslibrary.parliament.uk/resources for more information.
Feedback
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly
available briefings is correct at the time of publication. Readers should be
aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated to reflect
subsequent changes.
If you have any comments on our briefings please email
papers@parliament.uk. Please note that authors are not always able to
engage in discussions with members of the public who express opinions
about the content of our research, although we will carefully consider and
correct any factual errors.
You can read our feedback and complaints policy and our editorial policy at
commonslibrary.parliament.uk. If you have general questions about the work
of the House of Commons email hcenquiries@parliament.uk.
2 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
3.4 Equality and Human Rights Commission and the Equality Advisory
Support Service 10
3.5 Disability Law Service 11
3.6 Citizens Advice 11
3.7 Law Centres 12
3.8 LawWorks 12
3.9 Protect 12
3.10 Employment Tribunal Customer Contact Centre 13
3.11 Occupational charities 13
4 Representation in employment tribunals 14
4.1 Solicitors and barristers 14
4.2 Pro bono representation 14
4.3 Self-representation 15
3 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
Summary
This briefing provides information about sources of legal advice and
representation in employment law matters.
In most cases, the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas) is the
most appropriate initial source for anyone – employee or employer – in need
of external advice about a workplace dispute – their confidential helpline for
free advice is 0300 123 1100.
Legal advice should ideally be given by a suitably qualified person with
professional liability insurance. There are some places where professional
legal advice can be obtained free of charge and others where more general
free advice and information about legal matters can be obtained.
Where appropriate, the employer’s disciplinary or grievance procedure
should be used prior to starting legal proceedings. If dismissal has already
taken place enquiries should be made as to whether there is an internal
appeal process.
If an employer’s internal appeal process is exhausted without success the
employee may decide to bring a claim to an employment tribunal. There are
strict time limits for this. Although exceptions can sometimes be made, claims
must generally be registered within three months following the event which
gave rise to the claim. It is a legally required first step before bringing any
claim to notify Acas, so that they can offer early conciliation before the claim
proceeds to a tribunal.
For more information about the employment tribunal process itself, see the
Library’s constituency casework article Making a claim to an employment
tribunal.
4 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
1 Introduction
In the event of a workplace dispute, the employer’s disciplinary or grievance
procedure should be used in the first instance. If dismissal has already taken
place enquiries should be made as to whether there is an internal procedure
offering an appeal against this decision.
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas) webpage,
Disciplinary and Grievances Procedures, outlines employment rights in
relation to disciplinary and grievance procedures.1 There is also a statutory
Code of Practice which outlines the minimum standards employers must
follow when handling these issues.2 General employment rights advice may
be sought either from Acas or one of the organisations detailed in this note.
Where an employer’s internal procedures do not resolve a workplace dispute,
the dispute may lead to a claim to an employment tribunal. In some cases
one party, normally the employee, will not be represented; a so-called
‘litigant in person’ (this means a person who represents himself in court).3 The
Ministry of Justice’s (MoJ) employment tribunal statistics record that, in the
period 01 April 2021 to 31 March 2022, there were 90,056 claims accepted by
employment tribunals.4 66.6% of claimants were represented by a lawyer
whilst 2.1% used a trade union representative to help with their case. This
indicates that almost one-third of claimants go unrepresented.
When they were originally set up, employment tribunals, then known as
‘industrial tribunals’, were intended to provide “an easily accessible, speedy,
informal and inexpensive procedure” for resolving employment disputes.5
They were intended to be used by litigants in person. However, whilst
tribunals still aim to be accessible to litigants in person, the reality is that
procedural and substantive legal points may be confusing or hard to grasp
for an unrepresented litigant, as discussed in Struck Out, a 2012 book on
employment tribunals:
Tribunals are supposed to be accessible courts […] Yet many litigants find
Tribunals closed and off-putting places. The language of the court is highly
formal. The procedure of Tribunals is fixed. Parties address the court in a fixed
order. Factual submissions are made before legal submissions. To be most
effective in putting their case, even an unrepresented claimant will be
1 Acas, Disciplinary and Grievance Procedures (accessed 11 May 2023)
2 Acas, Code of Practice on disciplinary and grievance procedures, 11 March 2015
3 BIS, Findings from the Survey of Employment tribunal Applications 2008, March 2010; Ministry of
Justice, Litigants in person: a literature review, June 2011
4 Ministry of Justice, Employment Tribunal and Employment Appeals Tribunal Annual Tables -
2021/22, 9 March 2023
5 Royal commission on Trade Unions and Employers’ Associations 1965-1968: Report, Cmnd 3623;
(1968), para 578
5 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
expected to copy some of the mannerisms of an experienced barrister
addressing a higher court.6
Therefore, if an employment dispute has reached the possibility of a claim in
a tribunal, the parties may wish to obtain legal advice and possibly
representation. This briefing provides information about where such advice
and representation can be obtained, the funding of it and the time limits
within which employment tribunal claims may be made.
For more information about the employment tribunal process itself, including
the steps to be followed, how the hearings work and what happens
afterwards, see the Library’s constituency casework article Making a claim to
an employment tribunal.7
For more information about finding and paying for legal advice in general,
see the Library’s briefing paper Legal help: where to go and how to pay.8
6 David Renton, Struck Out: Why Employment Tribunals Fail Workers and What Can be Done, Pluto
Press, 2012
7 House of Commons Library, Making a claim to an employment tribunal, 28 April 2023
8 House of Commons Library, Legal help: where to go and how to pay, 24 September 2021
6 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
2 Funding and time limits
2.1 Funding
As a result of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 20129
civil legal aid is no longer available for either advice or representation in
employment law matters, except in discrimination claims under the Equality
Act 2010.10 This means that, in employment matters that do not involve
discrimination, people who wish to be represented by legal professionals such
as solicitors and barristers may have to pay for this privately. However, there
are many sources of free legal advice and it may be possible to obtain free
representation.
Another way in which parties can access legal services for tribunal
proceedings is through conditional fee agreements.11 This allows lawyers to
operate on a ‘no win no fee’ basis. The client may be required to pay a sum up
front to cover a legal expenses insurance premium. The most common type of
agreement is a hybrid agreement where the client pays fees up to an agreed
maximum, with the rest of the fees after that point being conditional on the
success of the case.
Legal aid in discrimination cases
Unlike in other employment law cases, in discrimination claims brought under
the Equality Act 2010, legal aid is still available from the government. For
more information including how to apply, see the Gov.uk page on Legal aid.12
Insurance
Some insurance policies include legal cover, which might allow people to get
a solicitor or other legal representation, including in employment tribunal
cases. People who need representation should check the details of any
insurance policies they have in case legal cover is included.
9 Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
10 Schedule 1, Part 1, paragraph 43
11 The Conditional Fee Agreements Order 2000, SI 2000/823
12 GOV.UK, Legal aid (accessed 30 May 2023)
7 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
2.2 Employment tribunal time limits
There are strict time limits to making a claim, with very few exceptions. These
are:
• three months for most claims
• six months for claims about redundancy pay or equal pay13
It is the responsibility of the employee (or claimant) to make sure their claim
against their employer (or respondent) is made in time. If the time limit
passes, a claimant can still register a claim.14 An employment tribunal judge
will then decide whether to accept it but may decide that the claim cannot
proceed due to being out of time. In most cases, unless there is a good reason
for the delay, time limits are strictly enforced.
These time limits are paused during the early conciliation process – for more
details see the Library’s constituency casework article Making a claim to an
employment tribunal.15
Appeals of employment tribunal decisions to the Employment Appeal Tribunal
are subject to different time limits. In general, this is six weeks from the date
that the original judgment was sent to the parties.16
13 Acas, Employment tribunal time limits, 18 October 2022
14 As above
15 House of Commons Library, Making a claim to an employment tribunal, 28 April 2023
16 Ministry of Justice website, Appeals guidance - Employment Appeal Tribunal (accessed 10 May
2023)
8 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
3 Sources of employment rights advice
3.1 Solicitors and barristers
The Law Society offers assistance to people who want to engage a solicitor
specialising in employment law. A searchable database of solicitors is
available here.17
Barristers are generally ‘instructed’ by a solicitor, which means the client
deals primarily with the solicitor, and the solicitor asks the barrister to
provide detailed legal advice and representation. Clients do not normally
deal directly with barristers. However, some barristers take on ‘public access’
work. This means they accept work directly. An online directory of public
access barristers is available on the Bar Council’s website.18
For further information on finding solicitors and barristers see the Library
briefing: Legal help: where to go and how to pay.19
3.2 Trade unions
Trade unions often provide legal advice and representation for their
members. Some union representatives personally represent union members in
employment tribunal proceedings, while others will engage lawyers to act on
behalf of the union member. The union representative at a given organisation
should be able to advise members on the services that the union provides.
Some unions offer a 24-hour helpline, although these are usually reserved for
legal advice on non-work-related matters. As a general rule, union workplace
representatives act as gatekeepers to the union’s employment law services.
3.3 The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service
17 Law Society website, Find a solicitor (accessed 11 May 2023)
18 The Bar Council website, Direct Access Portal (accessed 11 May 2023)
19 Commons Library Briefing sn03207, Legal help: where to go and how to pay, 24 September 2021
9 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas) is a nondepartmental public body funded largely by the Department for Business and
Trade (DBT). Its main function is to provide employers and employees with
advice to try and prevent or resolve employment disputes. As part of this,
Acas operates a free, impartial and confidential helpline which provides
information on employment rights. They also publish authoritative guidance
on a wide range of employment issues, available here.20
Full details of the helpline are available on the Acas website.21 The telephone
contact details:
• 0300 123 1100
• Monday-Friday, 8am-6pm
Acas must also legally be notified before bringing any claim to an
employment tribunal, so that they can offer both parties the option of early
conciliation.22
3.4 Equality and Human Rights Commission and
the Equality Advisory Support Service
The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) is a non-departmental
public body, established under the Equality Act 2006,23 sponsored by the
Government Equalities Office. It has a statutory mandate to challenge
discrimination and protect and promote human rights. It publishes
authoritative guidance on these issues, available on its website.24 It also
provides free advice on equality law issues.
The EHRC has run a Legal Support Scheme since 2017 which provides funding
and legal assistance to people to pursue discrimination claims specifically.
The EHRC itself also takes on itself some “landmark cases that make the law
clearer and set a precedent”.25
The EHRC refers people with discrimination claims in need of legal advice to
the Equality Advisory and Support Service (EASS), an independent service for
people who need advice on discrimination or human rights law. The EASS
does not provide legal advice itself but may help people find a solicitor who
can then apply to the EHRC’s Legal Support Scheme for funding.
The contact details are:
20 Acas website, Advice (accessed 11 May 2023)
21 Acas website, Contact us (accessed 11 May 2023)
22 Acas website, Find a solution to an employment dispute (accessed 30 May 2023)
23 Equality Act 2006
24 EHRC website, Your Rights Under the Equality Act 2010 (accessed 11 May 2023)
25 EHRC website, Legal Support Scheme (accessed 30 May 2023)
10 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
Phone: 0808 800 0082
Textphone: 0808 800 0084
You can email using the contact form on the EASS website.
Opening hours:
9am to 7pm Monday to Friday
10am to 2pm Saturday
closed on Sundays and Bank Holidays
3.5 Disability Law Service
The Disability Law Service provides a free advice line for persons who feel they
might have been subject to disability discrimination.26 The advice line can be
contacted on:
• 020 7791 9800 (Monday to Friday, 10am – 1pm, 2pm – 5pm), selecting
option 3 for employment matters.
Under their employment service, the Disability Law Service notes that they
cannot represent everyone and that their services are limited outside of
London, saying:
Current funding means we can only provide full support, including tribunal
appearances, for those in the London area. But we provide basic support for
callers wherever you are located.27
The Disability Law Service also offers a digital legal information platform
called WorkRights which can provide guidance on reasonable adjustments in
the workplace, including providing a template letter disabled workers can
send to their employer.
3.6 Citizens Advice
Citizens Advice provides free face-to-face and telephone advice on a range of
issues, including employment rights.
A local Citizens Advice bureau can be found by entering a postcode into the
“Find your nearest Citizens Advice” form on their Contact us page.28 Although
Citizens Advice operates primarily through individual local bureaus it also
26 DLS website (accessed 11 May 2023)
27 Disability Law Service website, Our Services/Employment (accessed 30 May 2023)
28 Citizens Advice website, Contact us (accessed 11 May 2023)
11 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
operates a web chat service and a national helpline.2930 In England, the
number for this is 0800 144 8848. In Wales, the number is 0800 702 2020. The
helpline is open 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday.
In Scotland, there is a separate organisation, Citizens Advice Scotland, which
fills the same function. Their helpline is 0800 028 1456.
3.7 Law Centres
Law Centres work within local communities and provide free face-to-face
legal advice, casework and representation. They specialise in social welfare
law, but will generally also cover employment law.31 A list of local Law
Centres is available on the Law Centres Network website.32
3.8 LawWorks
LawWorks is a charity that provides free legal help to individuals and
community groups who cannot afford to pay for it and who are unable to
access legal aid.33 It acts as a clearing house to connect eligible individuals
with solicitors that are willing to act for them for free.
LawWorks’ website states that it provides assistance through free legal
advice clinics and offers a search function to find the nearest clinic on any
legal area such as employment law.34
3.9 Protect
Protect (formerly known as Public Concern at Work) is a charity established in
October 1993 which offers legal advice about whistleblowing.35 It is important
that individuals who want to whistleblow about a public interest concern do
so in accordance with the statutory procedure, otherwise they may not be
protected by whistleblowing law. Protect operate a free advice line, managed
by lawyers and subject to lawyer-client privilege (confidential). The advice
line can be reached on: 020 3117 2520.
29 Citizens Advice website, Chat with an advisor online (accessed 30 May 2023)
30 Citizens Advice website, Contact us, (accessed 11 May 2023)
31 Law Centres website, I am looking for advice (accessed 11 May 2023)
32 Law Centres Network website, Law Centres (accessed 11 May 2023)
33 LawWorks website (accessed 11 May 2023)
34 LawWorks, Find a legal advice clinic near you (accessed 30 May 2023)
35 Protect website (accessed 11 May 2023)
12 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
3.10 Employment Tribunal Customer Contact
Centre
While they cannot give legal advice or help with the subject matter of cases,
the Employment Tribunal Customer Contact Centre can provide information
about how the employment tribunal system works and answer questions
about the procedure and processes involved.
Telephone: 0300 123 1024
3.11 Occupational charities
Certain charities exist to support people who work in specific professions. For
example, the Bank Workers Charity supports current and former bank workers
and their families, while the Retail Trust provides similar support to people
working in the retail sector.
These charities can offer a range of support, including financial assistance in
cases of hardship, health and wellbeing support, guidance about navigating
workplace policies and, in some cases, access to legal advice.
Charity directory Charity Choice has a list of professional and trade support
charities.
13 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
4 Representation in employment tribunals
4.1 Solicitors and barristers
Either solicitors or barristers can represent litigants at an employment
tribunal. For details of how to find a solicitor or barrister see above (section
3.1).
4.2 Pro bono representation
Pro bono legal services provide legal advice and/or representation free of
charge. Individuals unable to afford to pay for representation at an
employment tribunal, but who desire professional assistance, may wish to
enlist the help of such services.
The main pro bono service providers that can assist with representation at an
employment tribunal are set out below.
Advocate
Advocate is a charity that provides free legal assistance from volunteer
barristers in all areas of law, including employment law, where the individual
is unable to pay or obtain legal aid. Advocate works with over 4,500 volunteer
barristers and in 2019 they received over 2,000 applications for support.36
Individuals can complete an application form online once they have checked
they can apply via the eligibility checker on the Advocate website. The
documents that must be included with the application in employment cases
are set out on pages 7-8 of Advocate’s full document list (PDF).37 Applications
must be submitted at least three weeks before help is needed.
Advocate can be contacted on:
• 020 7092 3960 (voicemail only service) or via their online ‘contact us’
form.
36 Advocate, ‘Our history’, (accessed 10 May 2023)
37 Advocate, Documents to be included with an application, pages 7-8 Employment cases (accessed
10 May 2023)
14 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
Free Representation Unit (FRU)
The FRU provides free representation in employment tribunals for some
people who are not eligible for legal aid and cannot afford lawyers. Most of
their work is done by law students or early career legal professionals. FRU
mostly only takes cases referred to them by one of their referral agencies,
including Citizens Advice and several other organisations listed above.38
However the FRU also operate a self-referral scheme where members of the
public can get in touch directly to ask for representation at a short tribunal
hearing. To be eligible the claim must be:
• An Employment Tribunal claim
• Listed for a final hearing of one or two days
• Being heard in London or the South East39
Tel: 020 7611 9555, open Monday to Friday between 2pm and 4pm.
4.3 Self-representation
As noted at the beginning of this paper, in the majority of employment
tribunals one party will represent him or herself, and this party will typically
be the employee. People who represent themselves in court are referred to as
‘litigants in person’.40 Litigants in person unfamiliar with legal procedure,
advocacy and the law find it difficult to present their case in its best light.
The Bar Council has produced A Guide to Representing Yourself in Court
(PDF), which is intended to assist litigants in person.41 Pages 35-37 deal with
employment tribunals.
The Bar Standards Board has some information online for people representing
themselves in court, which includes links to further resources.42
As part of the Litigant in Person Support Strategy, the Central England Law
Centre have produced guidance on How do I represent myself at an
Employment Tribunal?.43
38 FRU website, Referral Agencies (accessed 30 May 2023)
39 FRU website, Employment Self-Referral (accessed 30 May 2023)
40 Bar Standards Board, Information for people representing themselves in court (accessed 10 May
2023)
41 The Bar Council, A Guide to Representing Yourself in Court, April 2013
42 Bar Standards Board, as above.
43 Central England Law Centre, How do I represent myself at an Employment Tribunal?
15 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

Legal advice and help in employment matters
The government’s website GOV.UK also has some information about how
someone can represent themselves in legal proceedings.
Advicenow
Advicenow is an independent not-for-profit website, run by the charity Law for
Life: the Foundation for Public Legal Education. Their website contains guides
to help people go to court or a tribunal without the help of a lawyer.44
44 Advice Now, Going to a tribunal (accessed 11 May 2023)
16 Commons Library Research Briefing, 9 December 2024

The House of Commons Library is a research and
information service based in the UK Parliament.
Our impartial analysis, statistical research and
resources help MPs and their staff scrutinise
legislation, develop policy, and support constituents.
Our published material is available to everyone
on commonslibrary.parliament.uk.
Get our latest research delivered straight to your inbox.
Subscribe at commonslibrary.parliament.uk/subscribe
or scan the code below:
commonslibrary.parliament.uk
@commonslibrary