BRIEFING PAPER
Number CBP 4526, 20 June 2018
Unfair dismissal:
By Doug Pyper
qualifying service rule
Contents:
1. The qualifying period
2. History
www.parliament.uk/commons-library | intranet.parliament.uk/commons-library | papers@parliament.uk | @commonslibrary

2 Unfair dismissal: qualifying service rule
Cover page image copyright Click & browse to copyright info for stock image

3 Commons Library Briefing, 20 June 2018
Summary
Employees acquire the right not to be unfairly dismissed after two years of continuous
employment with their employer. The two-year period was implemented by the Unfair
Dismissal and Statement of Reasons for Dismissal (Variation of Qualifying Period) Order
2012 (SI 2012/989), affecting persons whose employment commenced on or after 6 April
2012.
Immediately prior to this, section 108 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provided for a
one-year qualifying period. Since the right to claim unfair dismissal was introduced by the
Industrial Relations Act 1971, the qualifying period has been amended several times,
ranging between six months and two years.
The qualifying period applies to normal unfair dismissal claims. Besides these, legislation
deems certain reasons for dismissal to be “automatically unfair”. If dismissal is for one of
these reasons the qualifying period will generally not apply.

4 Unfair dismissal: qualifying service rule
1. The qualifying period
With effect from 6 April 2012 the normal qualifying period of
continuous employment for unfair dismissal rights was increased to two
years. Immediately prior to that it was one year.
The period of employment must be unbroken to qualify for the right.
Continuity is broken by a gap in employment of a week or more,
although gaps due to temporary cessation of work or illness/injury do
not break continuity.1 A transfer to a new employer will not necessarily
break continuity; for example, TUPE transfers or employment by an
associated employer will not break continuity.
The two-year qualifying period applies to normal unfair dismissal cases.
That is to say, cases where the employee argues that the employer’s
decision to dismiss was outside of the range of reasonable responses
open to a reasonable employer in the circumstances.
A dismissed employee who has not completed the relevant period of
service might still be able to pursue a claim if the reason for dismissal is
one deemed by statute to be “automatically unfair”. Most, but not all,
types of automatically unfair dismissal are not subject to a qualifying
period. Additionally, protection against discrimination is not subject to
any qualifying period.
1.1 Automatically unfair dismissal
The provisions for automatically unfair dismissal are found mainly in
sections 99 – 108 of the Employment Rights Act 1996, although others
are found elsewhere in employment legislation. The various grounds for
claiming automatically unfair dismissal are summarised below.
• Jury service – dismissal for taking time off work for jury service
• Leave for family reasons – dismissal for reasons related to
pregnancy, childbirth, maternity, paternity, adoption leave,
antenatal leave, parental leave, shared parental leave or time off
for dependents
• Health and safety cases – see below
• Sunday work – dismissal of a shop or betting worker because
they refuse to work (or work additional hours) on Sunday
• Working time regulations – dismissal for asserting rights under
the Working Time Regulations 1998
• Pension fund trustees – dismissal for performing (or proposing
to perform) functions as an appointed trustee of a relevant
occupational pension scheme
• Employee representatives – dismissal for performing or
proposing to perform any functions as an employee representative
or candidate for election in respect of employees’ rights to be
1 Employment Rights Act 1996, section 210(4)

5 Commons Library Briefing, 20 June 2018
consulted in the event of proposed multiple redundancies or
sale/transfer of the employing business
• Whistleblowing – dismissal for making a protected disclosure
• Assertion of statutory rights – dismissal on grounds of
"assertion of a statutory right". Relevant statutory rights for this
purpose are defined in section 104(4) ERA
• National Minimum Wage – dismissal in connection with an
attempt to exercise any right under the National Minimum Wage
Act or seek enforcement of the National Minimum Wage
• Tax credits – dismissal if the principal reason relates to a claim for
tax credits
• Flexible working arrangements – dismissal for making (or
proposing to make) an application for flexible working
arrangements
• Pension enrolment – dismissal in connection with pension
enrolment
• Study and training – dismissal in relation to exercising the
statutory right to make request in relation to study or training
• Trade union blacklist – dismissal for a reason relating to a trade
union blacklist prohibited by the Employment Relations Act 1999
(Blacklists) Regulations 2010
• Employee shareholder status – dismissal for refusing to accept
an offer of employee shareholder status
• Improper selection for redundancy – selection for redundancy
for a reason that would otherwise be regarded as an
automatically unfair dismissal, subject to the condition that "the
circumstances constituting the redundancy applied equally to one
or more other employees in the same undertaking who held
positions similar to that held by the employee and who have not
been dismissed by the employer"
• Fixed term contracts – dismissal for exercising or attempting to
exercise rights under the Fixed-Term Employees (Prevention of
Less Favourable Treatment) Regulations 2002, for employees who
work under fixed-term contracts
• Part time workers – dismissal for asserting rights under the Parttime Workers (Prevention of Less Favourable Treatment)
Regulations 2000
• Membership or non-membership of a trade union – dismissal
of an employee, including selection for redundancy, on grounds
related to union membership
• Industrial action – dismissal for involvement in industrial action
during the 12 weeks of “protected industrial action” under
section 238A of the Trade Union and Labour Relations
(Consolidation) Act 1992
• Information and consultation
─ dismissal for exercising rights under the Information and
Consultation of Employees Regulations 2004

6 Unfair dismissal: qualifying service rule
─ dismissal in connection with information and consultation
rights of occupational and personal pension scheme
members -Occupational and Personal Pension Schemes
(Consultation by Employers and Miscellaneous Amendment)
Regulations 2006
─ dismissal in connection with rights in respect of European
Cooperative Societies - European Cooperative Society
(Involvement of Employees) Regulations 2006
─ dismissal in connection with the rights of employees
involved in cross-border mergers -Companies (Cross-Border
Mergers) Regulations 2007
─ dismissal in connection with the rights of employees of
European public limited liability companies - European
Public Limited-Liability Company (Employee Involvement)
(Great Britain) Regulations 2009
• Recognition of trade union – dismissal for a reason relating to
obstruction or promotion of official recognition of a trade union
• Right to be accompanied at disciplinary or grievance
hearing – dismissal for relying on the right to be accompanied by
a fellow worker or trade union representative at internal
disciplinary and grievance procedure hearings
• Spent conviction - dismissal because of a spent conviction
within the meaning of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1971
unless the employee falls within a category excluded from the Act
by statutory order
• Taking part in union activities – dismissal if the principal reason
was that the employee "had taken part, or proposed to take part,
in the activities of an independent trade union at an appropriate
time" (Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act
1992, s152(1)(b))
• Time off for dependents – dismissal in connection with
exercising the right to time off for dependents
• TUPE transfer – dismissal for a reason connected with a sale or
other transfer of a business covered by the Transfer of
Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 2006
Health and safety
The normal qualifying period is reduced to one month if the dismissal is
due to a requirement or recommendation relating to suspension on
medical grounds: see Employment Rights Act 1996, section 64(2).
Under section 100 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 dismissal is
automatically unfair in six specified health and safety cases,2 as follows:
1 The employee was carrying out or proposed to carry out activities
in connection with prevention of health and safety risks at work,
having been designated to do so by the employer.
2 This implemented the EC Health and Safety Framework Directive 89/391

7 Commons Library Briefing, 20 June 2018
2 The employee, being an appointed safety representative,
performed or proposed to perform his duties as such.
3 The employee was exercising rights under the Health and Safety
(Consultation with Employees) Regulations 1996.
4 The employee brought to the employer's attention, by reasonable
means, circumstances connected with their work which he
reasonably believed were harmful or potentially harmful, provided
there was no safety representative or safety committee whose
attention could be drawn to the matter.
5 The employee left or proposed to leave their place of work
because they reasonably believed there was serious and imminent
danger which they could not reasonably be expected to avert.
6 The employee took or proposed to take appropriate steps to
protect themselves or others from danger which they reasonably
believed to be serious and imminent, unless those steps were so
negligent that dismissal would be justified.

8 Unfair dismissal: qualifying service rule
2. History
The right to claim unfair dismissal was introduced by the Industrial
Relations Act 1971. At that time the qualifying period was two years.3 It
has changed many times since, ranging between six months and two
years.
• The Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974 reduced the
period to six months, following a (six month) transition period in
which it was one year4
• The Unfair Dismissal (Variation of Qualifying Period) Order 1979
(SI 1979/959) increased it to one year
• The Employment Act 1980 increased it to two years for
employees in firms with fewer than 21 employees
• The Unfair Dismissal (Variation of Qualifying Period) Order 1985
(SI 1985/82) increased it to two years in all cases
• The Unfair Dismissal and Statement of Reasons for Dismissal
(Variation of Qualifying Period) Order 1999 (SI 1999/1436)
lowered it to six months
• The Unfair Dismissal and Statement of Reasons for Dismissal
(Variation of Qualifying Period) Order 2012 (SI 2012/989)
increased it to two years
Originally, the only people able to claim unfair dismissal were those who
worked 21-or-more hours a week.5 The Employment Protection Act
1975 reduced this to 16 hours a week and allowed part-time workers
who worked between 8 and 16 hours a week to claim the right after
five years' service.6 On 3 March 1994, the House of Lords ruled that this
law amounted to indirect discrimination against women as more
women than men worked under 16 hours a week. It was, therefore,
incompatible with EC law.7 The Government eventually laid a Statutory
Instrument which amended the Employment Protection (Consolidation)
Act 1978 to take account of this judgment.8 It removed all references
to hours worked from the Act so that all employment rights applied
equally irrespective of hours are worked.
In R v Secretary of State for Employment ex parte Seymour-Smith and
Perez, the Court of Appeal ruled that the two-year qualifying period
was discriminatory in certain circumstances.9 Ms Seymour-Smith and
Ms Perez were both dismissed in May 1991 after having been employed
for fifteen months by their employers. The Unfair Dismissal (Variation of
3 Section 28
4 Schedule 1, para 10
5 Industrial Relations Act 1971, s27(1)(f)
6 Schedule 16, Part II, para 14 - brought into force on 1 February 1977 by the
Employment Protection Act 1975 (Commencement No 6) Order (1976 SI
1976/1996)
7 Regina v Secretary of State for Employment ex parte Equal Opportunities
Commission and Another [1994] UKHL 2
8 The Employment Protection (Part-time Employees) Regulations 1995 (SI 1995/31)
9 [1995] ICR 919

9 Commons Library Briefing, 20 June 2018
the Qualifying Period) Order 198510 had increased the qualifying period
for unfair dismissal claims from one to two years' service, so both
women had insufficient service to take their case to an industrial
tribunal. The women applied for judicial review in the High Court, and
sought orders quashing the 1985 Order and declaring it incompatible
with the EC Equal Treatment Directive.11 They argued that fewer
women than men were able to meet the two-year qualifying rule; that
there was no objective justification, unrelated to sex, for the rule; and
that it therefore breached the Directive's prohibition on indirect
discrimination against women in employment.
In February 2000 the House of Lords, having considered the equivocal
decision of the European Court of Justice, ruled against the
employees.12 They agreed that the two-year qualification period was
indirectly sex discriminatory. However, their Lordships held that, at the
time of dismissal in 1991, a two-year qualification period had been
objectively justified. It was justified by reference to the Government’s
view that, had there not been a two-year qualification period employers
might have been less likely to recruit new staff. In any event, by that
time the Labour Government had reduced the period from two years to
one, by the Unfair Dismissal and Statement of Reasons for Dismissal
(Variation of Qualifying Period) Order 1999.
In May 2011, under Coalition Government, the Department for
Business, Innovation and Skills issued a consultation - Resolving
Workplace Disputes - which considered various matters, including
increasing the qualifying period.13 The Government set out its rationale
for increasing the qualifying period in its response to the consultation:
While there are clearly divergent views on the merits of the
proposal, we consider that business stakeholders are best placed
to evaluate the likely impact on business confidence. Improving
business confidence (and the economic benefits which would flow
from such an improvement) is a key aim of Government policy.
As well as a positive impact on business confidence, we consider
that there is a potential secondary benefit for employees recruited
into roles with a high training requirement (where there may be a
risk of employers taking a cautious approach and dismissing
employees before they qualify for the right not to be unfairly
dismissed, if there is uncertainty that they will achieve the
required standard).
The extension of the qualifying period is also consistent with the
general aim set out in the RWD consultation of reducing the
number of tribunal claims. However, in light of the consultation,
we have revised down our estimate of the number of claims that
will be saved. This is because we are now assuming that all claims
currently under multiple jurisdictions (and including an unfair
dismissal claim) will proceed under the other jurisdiction(s). We
had previously assumed that half of such claims would be
withdrawn. This means that the measure is now expected to
10 SI 1985/782
11 76/207/EEC
12 R v Secretary of State for Employment, Ex Parte Seymour Smith and Another
[2000] UKHL 12
13 BIS & HMCTS, Resolving Workplace Disputes: a consultation, January 2011

10 Unfair dismissal: qualifying service rule
result in a reduction in tribunal claims of between 2,100 - 3,200
claims, representing 4% - 7% of all unfair dismissal claims. When
the wider impact of early conciliation is taken into account, the
impact decreases further so that we can expect a reduction of
around 1,600 – 2,100 claims. The detail of this change is set out
in the Impact Assessment.
We are unconvinced by arguments made by some respondents to
the consultation that there could be widespread substitution of
current unfair dismissal claims into other jurisdictions, such as
discrimination. There is little evidence that, where there are
grounds for a discrimination claim, individuals are currently
choosing to pursue an unfair dismissal claim instead. Furthermore,
other Resolving Workplace Disputes proposals aim to encourage
early resolution of disputes (for example, greater use of pre-claim
conciliation). This will help to avoid weak claims from being
pursued in other jurisdictions.
As detailed in the Equality Impact Assessment, there is a degree of
disparity of impact from extending the qualifying period.
However, the Government does not consider that, an extension of
the unfair dismissal qualifying period would cause a considerable
disparity of impact on any particular group. Furthermore, we
believe that extending the qualifying period is a proportionate
means of achieving the legitimate aim of improving business
confidence to recruit and retain staff. We are committed to
assessing the impact of policy changes and we will monitor the
impact, including the equality impact, of this proposal as part of
our overall assessment of the implementation of the Resolving
Workplace Dispute proposals.
As set out in the Impact Assessment, the Government has
considered the alternative option of extending the qualifying
period only for small businesses. However, there does not appear
to be strong evidence that small businesses are disproportionately
affected by unfair dismissal rules. Data from a 2008 Survey of
employment tribunal claimants shows that 34% of unfair
dismissal claims involve businesses with fewer than 50 employees,
whereas such businesses employ 37% of the workforce. There
was no pattern in responses to consultation to suggest small firms
are more concerned about the qualifying period. Furthermore,
extending the qualifying period only for small businesses would
reduce the benefits associated with this proposal. The
Government has therefore decided to go ahead with extending
the qualifying period for all businesses. 14
The qualifying period was then increased to two years, by the Unfair
Dismissal and Statement of Reasons for Dismissal (Variation of
Qualifying Period) Order 2012 (SI 2012/989).
14 BIS & HMCTS, Resolving Workplace Disputes: Government response to the
consultation, November 2011

About the Library
The House of Commons Library research service provides MPs and their staff
with the impartial briefing and evidence base they need to do their work in
scrutinising Government, proposing legislation, and supporting constituents.
As well as providing MPs with a confidential service we publish open briefing
papers, which are available on the Parliament website.
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly
available research briefings is correct at the time of publication. Readers should
be aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated or otherwise
amended to reflect subsequent changes.
If you have any comments on our briefings please email papers@parliament.uk.
Authors are available to discuss the content of this briefing only with Members
and their staff.
If you have any general questions about the work of the House of Commons
you can email hcenquiries@parliament.uk.
Disclaimer
This information is provided to Members of Parliament in support of their
parliamentary duties. It is a general briefing only and should not be relied on as
a substitute for specific advice. The House of Commons or the author(s) shall
not be liable for any errors or omissions, or for any loss or damage of any kind
arising from its use, and may remove, vary or amend any information at any
time without prior notice.
The House of Commons accepts no responsibility for any references or links to,
BRIEFING PAPER
or the content of, information maintained by third parties. This information is
Number CBP 4526
provided subject to the conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.
20 June 2018