The Equality Act 2010
The Equality Act 2010 consolidates most equality law into one Act. It prohibits
conduct and creates duties in relation to ‘protected characteristics’. There
are nine protected characteristics, listed in section 4 of the Act, ranging from
age through to sexual orientation.
The Act prohibits direct and indirect discrimination, and harassment and
victimisation. It also prohibits discrimination in relation to something arising
from a person’s disability, and creates a duty to make reasonable
adjustments for disabled people.
The Act applies in various scenarios, including at work, in education and in
relation to services and public functions.
Public authorities are subject to a Public Sector Equality Duty. The Duty
means they must ‘have due regard’ to equality considerations when
exercising public functions.
Except for in Northern Ireland, which has its own equality legislation, equality
law is largely reserved to the UK Parliament. The legal concepts in this
briefing apply across England, Wales and Scotland.
The Equality and Human Rights Commission
The Equality and Human Rights Commission was established by the Equality
Act 2006, with a duty to promote and encourage understanding of equality
and human rights.
Individuals enforce their rights under the Equality Act 2010 before the courts.
However, the Commission also has a range of powers at its disposal to
enforce equality law at a more institutional level, and often strategically
intervenes as a party to litigation if doing so could help develop equality law.

1 Introduction
The Equality Act 2010 (the Act) repealed, replaced and consolidated the
principles of earlier equality legislation. The Act codifies UK equality law,
which is part domestic in origin, part derived from EU law.1
1.1 Protected characteristics
The Act prohibits certain types of conduct and creates duties in relation to
‘protected characteristics’. Section 2 of this briefing (‘Key concepts’) explains
these prohibitions and duties. The below lists the protected characteristics.
Each link goes to the section of the Act that defines the relevant
characteristic:
• age
• disability
• gender reassignment
• marriage and civil partnership
• pregnancy and maternity (not defined in the Act)
• race
• religion or belief
• sex
• sexual orientation.
1.2 Scope of the Act
The prohibitions and duties in the Act only apply in specific contexts. This
means that discrimination isn’t prohibited generally – for example, in social
situations – but in specific contexts, such as the workplace. Broadly, the Act
prohibits discrimination in relation to:
• services and public functions
• work
• the management and disposal of premises
• education
• clubs and associations
• transport.

2 Key concepts
2.1 Direct and indirect discrimination
The Act identifies two types of discrimination: direct and indirect.
Direct discrimination occurs when a person, because of a protected
characteristic, treats another less favourably than they would treat those
without the characteristic.2
Indirect discrimination occurs when a person applies a ‘provision, criterion
or practice’ which, although applied to persons with different protected
characteristics (e.g., males and females) puts one group at a particular
disadvantage (e.g., disadvantages females but not males).3 The Act’s
Explanatory Notes provide an example:
A woman is forced to leave her job because her employer operates a
practice that staff must work in a shift pattern which she is unable to
comply with because she needs to look after her children at particular
times of day, and no allowances are made because of those needs. This
would put women (who are shown to be more likely to be responsible for
childcare) at a disadvantage, and the employer will have indirectly
discriminated against the woman unless the practice can be justified.4
Indirect discrimination may be lawful if shown to be a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim.
2.2 Discrimination arising from disability
In addition to direct and indirect discrimination, section 15 of the Act states
that a person discriminates against a disabled person if they treat the
disabled person unfavourably because of ‘something arising in consequence’
of their disability. An Equality and Human Rights Commission Statutory Code
Practice gives an example:
A mother seeks admission to a privately run nursery for her son who has
Hirschsprung’s disease, which means that he does not have full bowel
control. The nursery says that they cannot admit her son because he is
not toilet trained and all the children at the nursery are. The refusal to
admit the boy is not because of his disability itself; but he is being treated
unfavourably because of something arising in consequence of his
disability.
This type of discrimination will be unlawful if the person cannot justify the
treatment. However, it will not be unlawful discrimination if the person can
show they did not know, and could not reasonably have been expected to
know, about the disability. The Act’s Explanatory Notes illustrate as follows:
The licensee of a pub refuses to serve a person who has cerebral palsy
because she believes that he is drunk as he has slurred speech. However,
the slurred speech is a consequence of his impairment. If the licensee is
able to show that she did not know, and could not reasonably have been
expected to know, that the customer was disabled, she has not subjected
him to discrimination arising from his disability.
However, in the example above, if a reasonable person would have known
that the behaviour was due to a disability, the licensee would have
subjected the customer to discrimination arising from his disability,
unless she could show that ejecting him was a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim.

2.3 Reasonable adjustments for disabled people
The Act also creates a positive duty to anticipate the needs of, and make
reasonable adjustments for, disabled people.
For example, in the context of services, the objective of the duty is to, so far as
is reasonably practicable
approximate the access enjoyed by disabled people to that enjoyed by the
rest of the public. The purpose of the duty to make reasonable
adjustments is to provide access to a service as close as it is reasonably
possible to get to the standard normally offered to the public at large
The duty is contained in section 20 and comprises three requirements. The
requirements are to ‘take such steps as it is reasonable to have to take’ to:

• avoid putting disabled people at a substantial disadvantage where a
provision, criterion or practice would put them at that disadvantage
compared with people who are not disabled
– for example, adjusting a ‘no dogs’ policy for visually impaired
people
• remove, alter or provide means of avoiding physical features where those
features put disabled people at a substantial disadvantage compared
with people who are not disabled
– for example, providing a wheelchair ramp alongside stairs
• provide an auxiliary aid where disabled people would, but for the
provision of that aid, be put at a substantial disadvantage in comparison
with people who are not disabled
– for example, providing an induction loop for hearing impaired
people.
What is deemed to be reasonable will depend on the circumstances. The
Equality and Human Rights Commission has identified the following
potentially relevant factors:
• whether taking the step would be effective
• the extent to which it is practicable
• the financial and other costs of making the adjustment
• the availability of the necessary financial and other resources
• the extent of any disruption which taking the steps would cause
• the amount of any resources already spent on making adjustments.
Ultimately, the only way to determine for certain whether any adjustment
would be reasonable to have to make is for a court to decide the issue.

2.4 Harassment and victimisation
The Equality Act also prohibits harassment and victimisation.
Harassment is defined as engaging in unwanted conduct related to a
protected characteristic, which has the effect of violating a person’s dignity or
creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive
environment for that person.11 The Act’s Explanatory Notes provide examples
of this:
• A white worker who sees a black colleague being subjected to
racially abusive language could have a case of harassment if the
language also causes an offensive environment for her.
• An employer who displays any material of a sexual nature, such as a
topless calendar, may be harassing her employees where this makes
the workplace an offensive place to work for any employee, female
or male.
• A shopkeeper propositions one of his shop assistants. She rejects his
advances and then is turned down for promotion which she believes
she would have got if she had accepted her boss’s advances. The
shop assistant would have a claim of harassment.
Victimisation is defined as subjecting an individual to detriment because they
have done a ‘protected act’ (or in the belief that they have).13 Broadly, the
protected acts are acts relating to bringing a claim under the Equality Act or
alleging a person has contravened the Act. For example:
A gay man sues a publican for persistently treating him less well than
heterosexual customers. Because of this, the publican bars him from the
pub altogether. This would be victimisation.

2.5 The Public Sector Equality Duty
The Public Sector Equality Duty is contained in Part 11 of the Act and related
regulations. The Duty consolidates and replaces equality duties in previous
legislation, including the disability equality duty in section 49A of the
Disability Discrimination Act 1995.
The main duty is set out in section 149 of the Act. Under section 149 public
authorities must, in the exercise of their functions, ‘have due regard to the
need to’:
• eliminate discrimination, harassment, victimisation and any other
conduct that is prohibited by the Act
• advance equality of opportunity between persons who share a relevant
protected characteristic and persons who don’t
• foster good relations between persons who share a relevant protected
characteristic and persons who don’t.15
The Act does not identify what is meant by the phrase ‘have due regard’.
However, the term has been considered extensively by the courts.
Broadly, the principles that emerge from the case law are:
• the duty concerns the impact of a proposal on all persons with
protected characteristics and on any class of persons within a
protected category who might clearly be adversely affected
• it is not a question of ticking boxes, the duty must be approached in
substance, with rigour and with an open mind
• the duty must be fulfilled both before and during consideration of a
particular policy
• the public authority does not have to refer expressly to the duty whilst
exercising a public function
• decision-makers must be aware of the duty
• the duty is non-delegable
• it is good practice for an authority to keep a record showing that it has
considered the identified needs
• it is for the decision maker to decide what weight to give to the equality
implications of the decision.

In a leading Court of Appeal case, Lord Justice McCombe summarised the
effect of the Duty and its rationale:
It seems to have been the intention of Parliament that these
considerations … are now to be placed at the centre of formulation of
policy by all public authorities, side by side with all other pressing
circumstances of whatever magnitude.
It is for this reason that advance consideration has to be given to these
issues and they have to be an integral part of the mechanisms of
government…. There is a need for a "conscious approach" and the duty
must be exercised "in substance, with rigour and with an open mind" … In
the absence of evidence of a "structured attempt to focus upon the details
of equality issues" … a decision maker is likely to be in difficulties if his or
her subsequent decision is challenged.
In addition to the general Duty, some public bodies are subject to specific
duties and are required to report on various equality matters. The duties
differ across the devolved nations.
Equality Impact Assessments
It is important for public authorities to record the steps they’ve taken to meet
the Duty. Aside from this helping the authority to comply with the Duty in
practice, it would also be an important evidential requirement should the
authority be challenged in court for failing to comply with the Duty.
One of the ways (but not the only way) an authority can demonstrate this, is
through carrying out an equality impact assessment.

3 The Equality and Human Rights
Commission
The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) replaced the Equal
Opportunities Commission, Commission for Racial Equality and the Disability
Rights Commission with a single equality body. It is a non-departmental
public body in England, Wales and (in part) Scotland, responsible for
monitoring compliance with the Equality Act 2010.
Equality law is devolved in Northern Ireland; Northern Ireland has a separate
Equality Commission.
The EHRC is not responsible for enforcing the provisions of the Equality Act
2010. Individuals enforce their own rights through the courts. However, the
EHRC can intervene strategically in litigation to develop equality law, and has
a range of enforcement powers at its disposal.

3.1 EHRC duties
The EHRC is a statutory body, with statutory duties, established by the
Equality Act 2006 (the 2006 Act). Broadly, the 2006 Act requires the EHRC to
promote and encourage the understanding of - and good practice in relation
to - equality and human rights.
Section 3 of the 2006 Act contains the EHRC’s ‘general duty’, which requires
the EHRC to encourage and support the development of a society in which:
• people's ability to achieve their potential is not limited by prejudice or
discrimination
• there is respect for and protection of each individual's human rights
• there is respect for the dignity and worth of each individual
• each individual has an equal opportunity to participate in society
• there is mutual respect between groups based on understanding and
valuing of diversity and on shared respect for equality and human rights.
The EHRC must also monitor the law and progress towards development of a
society that reflects these values.

3.2 Powers
As noted, the EHRC is not responsible for the enforcement of equality rights at
an individual level. As with most other legal rights, it falls to individuals to
exercise their rights through the courts. The EHRC typically uses its powers at
an institutional level; for example, agreeing new policies with a large
company to avoid future discriminatory conduct.
The EHRC’s powers are set out in the 2006 Act, and include the following:
• formal inquiries
• formal investigations
• issuance of unlawful act notices
• a power to enter into agreements with parties by which the party
undertakes not to commit an unlawful act
• legal proceedings to prevent or restrain unlawful acts
• claims for judicial review
• assessing compliance with the Public Sector Equality Duty
• issuance of compliance notices.

3.3 Accountability
The EHRC accounts to Parliament through the Minister for Women and
Equalities. For example, it sends a copy of its annual report to the Minister,
who then lays it before Parliament.

3.4 Codes of practice
Under section 14 of the 2006 Act, the Commission may issue codes of practice
‘in connection with any matter addressed by the Equality Act 2010’.

4 Equality policy
The Office for Equality and Opportunity (OEO), previously the “Equality Hub”,
leads on equality policy. The OEO’s priorities include ensuring that equality
and opportunity are embedded throughout the government’s work and
improving the quality of evidence and data on equality.
Within the OEO are the Women and Equalities Unit, the Disability Unit, and the
Race Equality Unit.
4.1 Women and Equalities Unit (formerly the Government Equalities Office)
The Women and Equalities Unit (WEU) leads work on policy relating to gender
equality, LGBT+ people, and the overall framework of equality legislation in
the UK.
The WEU’s website lists its current priorities as:
• delivering the equalities legislation set out in the King’s Speech
including equality measures in the Employment Rights Bill and
the draft Conversion Practices Bill.
• delivering on the government’s manifesto commitments in
relation to LGBT+ people including improving the Gender
Recognition Act, whilst maintaining the single-sex spaces
exceptions in the Equality Act.
• addressing the discrimination and inequalities that LGBT+
people face.
• tackling violence against women and girls, in partnership with
the Home Office, FCDO and others.
• promoting women’s equality including tackling misogyny,
making work pay and eliminating the gender pay gap.
• championing the rights of British citizens abroad and using our
influence to promote international equality.
Ministers
The Minister for Women and Equalities is responsible for the following:
• promoting equality of opportunity for everyone, and reducing
negative disparities
• strategic oversight of Government’s equality policy, for women,
ethnicity and LGBT
• sponsorship of the Social Mobility Commission and Equality and
Human Rights Commission
• overview of the overarching equalities legislative framework,
including the Equality Act.
The Minister of State for Women and Equalities is responsible for the following
(some of which overlap with the responsibilities of the Minister for Women and
Equalities):
• the overall framework
• legislation including on women, disability, LGBT+ and race
• policy on women, LGBT+ and race
• sponsorship of the Equality and Human Rights Commission
• equality data and analysis
• international work on women, LGBT+ and race.

4.2 The Disability Unit (previously ‘Office for
Disability Issues’)
The Disability Unit aims to break down the barriers faced by disabled people
in the UK and to work across government to improve disabled people's lives.
The Disability Unit’s website lists its current priorities as:
• delivering the draft Equality (Race and Disability) Bill, as set out
in the King’s Speech
• ensuring that disabled people’s views and voices are at the
heart of everything the government does – we will do this by
building and maintaining relationships with disabled people and
their organisations, stakeholders and colleagues across
government, and using disabled people’s insights to drive real
change
• continuing to promote British Sign Language (BSL) and the
implementation of the BSL Act 2022, including by supporting the
BSL Advisory Board
• improving the quality of evidence and data and using it,
including disabled people’s lived experience, to support policies
and how they are delivered
• ensuring that UK disability policy and disabled people are
represented on international platforms, and promoting better
understanding of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities across government. 
Ministers
The Minister of State (Minister for Social Security and Disability) is responsible
for:
• Disability policy and cross-government responsibility for
disabled people
• Universal Credit and legacy benefits delivery
• Contributory benefits, Personal Independence Payment,
Disability Living Allowance and Employment Support Allowance
• Carer’s Allowance
• Housing
• Arm’s length body: Health and Safety Executive
• Serious Case Panel
• Uprating and benefit cap
• Oversight of Disability Unit, including disability elements in
equality legislation and international lead on disability.

4.3 Race Equality Unit
The Race Equality Unit (REU) aims to tackle racial and ethnic inequalities –
through legislation, policy and data.
The REU’s website lists its priorities as:
• Developing and delivering the draft Equality (Race and
Disability) Bill and wider cross-government actions to address
race and ethnic inequalities
• Collecting, analysing and publishing government data on the
experiences of people from different ethnic backgrounds on
Ethnicity facts and figures—an open source of data on race and
ethnicity.

The Permanent Under-Secretary of State (Minister of Equalities) is responsible
for race and ethnicity elements in equality legislation and race and ethnicity
policy.