Maximum weekly working
hours
1. Overview
You cannot work more than 48 hours a week on average - normally
averaged over 17 weeks (/maximum-weekly-working-hours/calculating-yourworking-hours). This law is sometimes called the ‘working time directive’ or
‘working time regulations’.
You can choose to work more by opting out (/maximum-weekly-workinghours/weekly-maximum-working-hours-and-opting-out) of the 48-hour week.
If you’re under 18, you cannot work more than 8 hours a day or 40 hours
a week.
Exceptions
You may have to work more than 48 hours a week on average if you work in
a job:
where 24-hour staffing is required
in the armed forces, emergency services or police
in security and surveillance
as a domestic servant in a private household
as a seafarer, sea-fisherman or worker on vessels on inland waterways
where working time is not measured and you’re in control, for example
you’re a managing executive with control over your decisions
Contact the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas) helpline
(/pay-and-work-rights) to get further advice on working hours.
What employers must do

Your employer needs to keep some records about working hours. Visit the
the records they need to keep.
2. Calculating your working hours
Average working hours are calculated over a ‘reference’ period, normally 17
weeks.
This means you can work more than 48 hours one week, as long as the
average over 17 weeks is less than 48 hours a week.
The 17 week period can be extended to a maximum of 52 weeks if this is
agreed, for example, by a trade union. You need to calculate the average for
the number of weeks in the agreement.
Your working hours cannot be averaged out if you’re under 18. You
cannot work more than 40 hours in any one week.
Exceptions
Some jobs have different reference periods, for example:
trainee doctors have a 26-week reference period
the offshore oil and gas sector has a 52-week reference period
What counts as work
A working week includes:
job-related training
time spent travelling if you travel as part of your job, for example sales
rep
working lunches, for example business lunches
time spent working abroad
paid overtime
unpaid overtime you’re asked to do
time spent on call at the workplace
any time that is treated as ‘working time’ under a contract
travel between home and work at the start and end of the working day (if
you do not have a fixed place of work)

What does not count as work
A working week does not include:
time you spend on call away from the workplace
breaks when no work is done, for example lunch breaks
travelling outside of normal working hours
unpaid overtime you’ve volunteered for, for example staying late to finish
something off
paid or unpaid holiday
travel to and from work (if you have a fixed place of work)
You have more than one job
Your combined working hours should not be more than 48 hours a week on
average.
If you work more than 48 hours on average, you can either:
sign an opt-out agreement (/maximum-weekly-working-hours/weeklymaximum-working-hours-and-opting-out)
reduce your hours to meet the 48-hour limit
3. Opting out of the 48 hour week
You can choose to work more than 48 hours a week on average if you’re
over 18. This is called ‘opting out’.
Your employer can ask you to opt out, but you cannot be sacked or treated
unfairly for refusing.
You can opt out for a certain period or indefinitely. It must be voluntary and
in writing.
Your employer must keep a record that you’ve opted out.
Example of opt-out agreement:
I [worker’s name] agree that I may work for more than an average of 48
hours a week. If I change my mind, I will give my employer [amount of
time - up to 3 months’] notice in writing to end this agreement.
Signed……………………………………
Dated…………………………………….

Workers who cannot opt out
You cannot opt-out of the 48 hour week if you’re:
airline staff
a worker on ships or boats
a worker in the road transport industry, for example delivery drivers
(except for drivers of vehicles under 3.5 tonnes using GB Domestic
drivers’ hours rules (/drivers-hours/gb-domestic-rules))
other staff who travel in and operate vehicles covered by EU rules on
drivers’ hours (/drivers-hours/eu-rules), for example bus conductors
a security guard on a vehicle carrying high-value goods
Cancelling an opt-out agreement
You can cancel your opt-out agreement whenever you want - even if it’s part
of your employment contract.
You must give your employer at least 7 days’ notice. You may have to give
your employer up to 3 months’ notice depending on what’s in your
agreement.
Your employer cannot force you to cancel your opt-out agreement.