Neonatal Care Pay and Leave
1. Overview
You and your partner may be able to get paid time off work if your newborn
baby is premature or sick and needs neonatal care.
This guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg) (/tal-absenoldeb-gofalnewyddenedigol).
‘Neonatal care’ is the name given to care for newborn babies which starts in
the first 28 days after birth. This may be for:
hospital care
medical care after leaving hospital - this must be under a consultant and
include ongoing visits or checks arranged by the hospital where your
baby was treated
palliative or end of life care
You may be able to get:
Neonatal Care Leave
Statutory Neonatal Care Pay
You can get one week’s leave for every 7 full and continuous days your
baby is in neonatal care, for up to 12 weeks.
You get Neonatal Care Pay and Leave in addition to other parental pay and
leave entitlements. If you’re already on maternity leave or adoption leave,
Neonatal Care Leave must be taken at the end of that entitlement.
There are rules about when you can take your leave (/neonatal-care-payleave/what-you-get) and how to claim (/neonatal-care-pay-leave/how-to-claim).
Employment rights when on leave
Your employment rights (/employee-rights-when-on-leave) are protected while
on Neonatal Care Leave. This includes your right to:
pay rises

build up (‘accrue’) holiday
return to work
2. What you can get
You may be entitled to Neonatal Care Leave, Statutory Neonatal Care Pay,
or both.
You can get one week’s leave for every 7 full and continuous days your
baby is in neonatal care.
Neonatal Care Leave
You can get up to 12 weeks’ Neonatal Care Leave if you’re classed as an
employee (/employment-status/employee). It does not matter how long you’ve
been with your employer.
You must take the leave within 68 weeks (just under 16 months) of your
baby’s birth date.
The notice period you must give your employer (/neonatal-care-pay-leave/howto-claim) will depend on whether you’re taking leave:
while your baby is in neonatal care, or up to a week after leaving (this is
sometimes called ‘tier 1’)
more than a week after your baby has left neonatal care (this is
sometimes called ‘tier 2’)
How you take the leave
While your baby is in neonatal care, or up to a week after leaving, you can
take leave in separate blocks of at least one week at a time.
After this, you must take leave in a single continuous block.
If you’re already taking maternity or adoption leave
If your baby enters neonatal care while you’re on Statutory Maternity Leave
or Statutory Adoption Leave, you must take your Neonatal Care Leave after
your maternity or adoption leave is finished.
Example
Your newborn baby gets sick and has to stay in neonatal care for 56
days. You’re already taking Statutory Maternity Leave.

Instead of losing 56 days (8 weeks) of leave, you add the Neonatal Care
Leave to the end of your 39 weeks of maternity leave.
If you’re taking Shared Parental Leave or Statutory Paternity Leave
You can take Neonatal Care Pay and Leave either:
before you start Statutory Paternity Leave or Shared Parental Leave
between blocks of Shared Parental Leave that you booked before your
baby started neonatal care (this includes if the Shared Parental Leave is
for another child)
If you’re using your leave and pay at least one week after your baby leaves
neonatal care, you must take all of it in a single block. You can do this
before or after your Shared Parental Leave or Statutory Paternity Leave.
Statutory Neonatal Care Pay
If you claim Neonatal Care Leave, you may also be able to claim Statutory
Neonatal Care Pay if you’re eligible (/neonatal-care-pay-leave/check-eligible).
You’ll get either £187.18 a week or 90% of your average weekly earnings
(whichever is lower).
Any money you get is paid the same way as your wages, for example
weekly or monthly, along with deductions for tax and National Insurance.
If you have more than one baby in neonatal care
If your babies are in neonatal care at the same time (for example, if you
have twins), you can only claim Neonatal Care Pay and Leave for one of
them, up to a maximum of 12 weeks.
If your babies are in neonatal care at separate times, you’ll be able to claim
for each of them - up to a maximum of 12 weeks in total.
3. Check if you're eligible
You may be able to get up to 12 weeks’ Neonatal Care Pay and Leave if:
your baby was born on or after 6 April 2025
your baby spends 7 days or more in a row in neonatal care
you’re the baby’s parent or partner of the baby’s mother, and have caring
responsibility for the baby

you’re taking the leave to care for the baby
You must also meet the eligibility criteria as an employee.
If you or your partner are an adoptive parent
You may be eligible if either:
the baby has been placed with you
you have the ‘official notification’ confirming you’re allowed to adopt (if
you’re adopting a baby from overseas)
If you or your partner had a baby with the help of a
surrogate parent
You may be eligible if:
you’re the intended parent and will be responsible for their care
you’ll have a parental order (/legal-rights-when-using-surrogates-anddonors/become-the-childs-legal-parent) within 6 months of the baby’s birth
date
Neonatal Care Leave
To get Neonatal Care Leave, you must:
be classed as an employee (/employment-status/employee) - it does not
matter how long you’ve worked for your employer
be employed in England, Scotland or Wales
give your employer notice (/neonatal-care-pay-leave/how-to-claim) for
Neonatal Care Leave
Statutory Neonatal Care Pay
To get Statutory Neonatal Care Pay, you must have been continuously
employed by your employer (/continuous-employment-what-it-is) for at least 26
weeks up to the end of what’s called the ‘qualifying week’.
If you get Maternity or Paternity Pay, the ‘qualifying week’ is the 15th week
before the baby is due. If you get Statutory Adoption Pay, it’s the week you
were told you’d been matched with the baby for adoption.

Otherwise, the ‘qualifying week’ is the week immediately before the baby
enters neonatal care.
You must also:
continue to be employed up to the week before you want the pay to start
earn on average £125 a week (before tax) or more, over an 8-week
period
4. How to claim
You claim Neonatal Care Pay and Leave through your employer. You must
take it within 68 weeks (just under 16 months) of your baby’s birth date,
including if your baby is adopted.
You must give your employer notice before you take Neonatal Care Pay and
Leave.
How much notice you must give depends on when you’re taking the leave
and pay.
If you’re taking leave and pay while your baby is in
neonatal care (or in the first week after)
This is sometimes called ‘tier 1’ leave.
You need to tell your employer on the day you want your leave to start,
ideally before the time you usually start work or as soon as you can
afterwards. You can give notice by phone, voicemail or text message - it
does not need to be in writing.
If you need to continue leave and pay for another week, you’ll need to let
your employer know again. You should do this by the end of the previous
week.
If your baby is likely to be in neonatal care for a long time, your employer
may agree that you can contact them less frequently.
You need to tell your employer the date your baby leaves neonatal care as
soon as possible.
You can give notice to your employer for pay up to 28 days after your leave
starts. You must give notice in writing - for example, an email or letter.
If you’re taking leave and pay more than a week after
your baby has left neonatal care

This is sometimes called ‘tier 2’ leave.
If you’re taking one week of leave and pay, you’ll need to tell your employer
15 days before you want your leave and pay to start. If you’re taking 2 or
more weeks’ leave and pay, you’ll need to tell them 28 days in advance.
You must give notice in writing - for example, an email or letter.
What you need to tell your employer
To claim neonatal care leave, you need to tell your employer:
your full name
your baby’s date of birth and, if adopted, the date they were placed with
you (or the date they entered into Great Britain if adopted from overseas)
the start and end date of your baby’s neonatal care
when you want your Neonatal Care Leave to begin
how many weeks’ leave you want to take
For pay and leave, you’ll also need to confirm:
you’ll care for the baby during the period you’re claiming for
you’re the baby’s parent or mother’s partner with caring responsibilities
for the baby - you’ll only need to give this information the first time you
claim leave and pay
You can do this by:
completing a declaration form (NEO3) online
(https://www.tax.service.gov.uk/guidance/claim-statutory-neonatal-carepay/start/about-this-form) - you’ll need to print this off and post or email it to
your employer
sending an email or letter to your employer
using your employer’s own form (if they have one)
If you have more than one baby in neonatal care
You’ll need to provide your employer with information for each baby.
If you disagree with a decision on Neonatal Care Pay

Contact your employer if you disagree with a decision on your claim for
Statutory Neonatal Care Pay, for example because you think they:
are paying you the wrong amount
have wrongly decided not to pay you statutory pay
If you cannot reach an agreement, you can contact the Statutory Payments
Dispute Team (/government/organisations/hm-revenue-customs/contact/statutorypayment-dispute-team). You must do this within 6 months of the date of the
decision.
5. Cancelling your leave or pay
You may be able to cancel your Neonatal Care Leave or Statutory Neonatal
Care Pay depending on when your leave is due to start.
You can rebook your leave and pay if you give your employer the correct
notice (/neonatal-care-pay-leave/how-to-claim).
You cannot cancel your leave or pay if it was due to start while your
baby was still receiving neonatal care (or in the first week after).
If your leave or pay is due to start more than a week
after your baby has left neonatal care
To cancel your Neonatal Care Leave or Statutory Neonatal Care Pay, you’ll
need to give written notice to your employer. When you need to tell them
depends on when your leave or pay is due to start.
If you’re taking:
one week’s leave - you must let your employer know you want to cancel
at least 15 days before the start of the planned leave
2 or more weeks’ leave - you must let your employer know you want to
cancel at least 28 days before the start of the planned leave