Maternity pay and leave
1. Overview
When you take time off to have a baby you might be eligible for:
Statutory Maternity Leave (/maternity-pay-leave/leave)
Statutory Maternity Pay (/maternity-pay-leave/pay)
paid time off for antenatal care (/working-when-pregnant-your-rights)
extra help (/maternity-pay-leave/extra-help) from the government
You can check what maternity pay and leave you’re eligible for (/maternitypay-leave/eligibility).
This guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg) (/tal-absenoldebmamolaeth).
There are rules on when and how to claim your paid leave (/maternity-payleave/how-to-claim) and if you want to change your dates (/maternity-payleave/leave).
You can work out your maternity pay and leave (/pay-leave-for-parents) online.
You may also be eligible to get Shared Parental Leave and Pay (/sharedparental-leave-and-pay).
Employment rights when on leave
Your employment rights (/employee-rights-when-on-leave) are protected while
on Statutory Maternity Leave. This includes your right to:
pay rises
build up (accrue) holiday
return to work

2. Leave
Statutory Maternity Leave is 52 weeks. It’s made up of:
Ordinary Maternity Leave - first 26 weeks
Additional Maternity Leave - last 26 weeks
You do not have to take 52 weeks but you must take 2 weeks’ leave after
your baby is born (or 4 weeks if you work in a factory).
Use the maternity planner (/pay-leave-for-parents) to work out the dates
for your ordinary and additional leave.
You may be entitled to take some of your leave as Shared Parental Leave
(/shared-parental-leave-and-pay).
Start date and early births
Usually, the earliest you can start your leave is 11 weeks before the
expected week of childbirth.
Leave will also start:
the day after the birth if the baby is early
automatically if you’re off work for a pregnancy-related illness in the 4
weeks before the week (Sunday to Saturday) that your baby is due
Use the maternity planner (/pay-leave-for-parents) to work out the earliest
date your maternity leave can start.
Change your date for returning to work
You must give your employer at least 8 weeks’ notice if you want to change
your return to work date.
3. Pay
Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP) is paid for up to 39 weeks. You get:
90% of your average weekly earnings (before tax) for the first 6 weeks
£187.18 or 90% of your average weekly earnings (whichever is lower) for
the next 33 weeks

SMP is paid in the same way as your wages (for example monthly or
weekly). Tax and National Insurance will be deducted.
Use the maternity pay calculator (/pay-leave-for-parents) to work out how
much you could get.
If you take Shared Parental Leave (/shared-parental-leave-and-pay) you’ll get
Statutory Shared Parental Pay (ShPP). ShPP is £187.18 a week or 90% of
your average weekly earnings, whichever is lower.
Start date
SMP usually starts when you take your maternity leave.
It starts automatically if you’re off work for a pregnancy-related illness in the
4 weeks before the week (Sunday to Saturday) that your baby is due.
Problems and disputes
Ask your employer to explain your SMP if you think it’s not right. If you
disagree about the amount or your employer cannot pay (for example
because they’re insolvent), contact the Statutory Payment Disputes Team
(/government/organisations/hm-revenue-customs/contact/statutory-payment-disputeteam).
4. Eligibility
Statutory Maternity Leave
You qualify for Statutory Maternity Leave if:
you’re an employee not a ‘worker’ (/employment-status)
you give your employer the correct notice (/maternity-pay-leave/how-toclaim)
It does not matter how long you’ve been with your employer, how many
hours you work or how much you get paid.
You cannot get Statutory Maternity Leave if you have a child through
surrogacy - you could get Statutory Adoption Leave and Pay (/adoptionpay-leave) instead.
Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP)

To qualify for SMP you must:
earn on average at least £125 a week
give the correct notice and proof you’re pregnant (/maternity-pay-leave/howto-claim)
have worked for your employer continuously (/continuous-employment-whatit-is) for at least 26 weeks continuing into the ‘qualifying week’ - the 15th
week before the expected week of childbirth
You cannot get SMP if you go into police custody during your maternity pay
period. It will not restart when you’re discharged.
Early births or you lose your baby
You can still get Statutory Maternity Leave and SMP if your baby:
is born early
is stillborn after the start of your 24th week of pregnancy
dies after being born
If you’re not eligible for SMP
Your employer must give you form SMP1 explaining why you cannot get
SMP within 7 days of making their decision. You may be eligible for
Maternity Allowance (/maternity-allowance) instead.
5. How to claim
Statutory Maternity Leave
At least 15 weeks before your due date, tell your employer when the baby is
due and when you want to start your maternity leave. Your employer can
ask for this in writing.
Your employer must write to you within 28 days confirming your start and
end dates.
Use the maternity planner (/pay-leave-for-parents) to work out when you
must claim your maternity leave.
Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP)

Tell your employer you want to stop work to have a baby and the day you
want your SMP to start. You must give them at least 28 days’ notice (in
writing if they ask for it) and proof that you’re pregnant.
Your employer must confirm within 28 days how much SMP you’ll get and
when it will start and stop.
If they decide you’re not eligible, they must give you form SMP1 within 7
days of making their decision and explain why.
Proof you’re pregnant
You need to give your employer proof of the pregnancy to get SMP. You do
not need it for maternity leave.
Within 21 days of your SMP start date (or as soon as possible if the baby’s
born early) give your employer either:
a letter from your doctor or midwife
your MATB1 certificate - doctors and midwives will give you this no more
than 20 weeks before the due date
You will not get SMP if you do not give your employer proof that the
baby is due.
6. Extra help
Maternity benefits
Use a benefits calculator (/benefits-calculators) to see what help you can get
from:
Universal Credit
Child Benefit
Income Support - you may get this while you’re not working
You could get a £500 Sure Start Maternity Grant (/sure-start-maternity-grant)
(usually if it’s your first child).
If you’re not eligible for Statutory Maternity Pay, you could get Maternity
Allowance (/maternity-allowance) from the government.
Company maternity schemes

You might get more than the statutory amount of leave and pay if your
employer has a company maternity scheme. They cannot offer you less
than the statutory amount.
Extra leave
You could get 18 weeks’ unpaid parental leave (/parental-leave) after the birth
- this may be restricted to 4 weeks per year.