Understanding your pay
1. Overview
When you start work, your employer should tell you how much you’ll be paid
and how often. They should also tell you:
the day or date you’ll be paid, for example each Friday or the last day of
the month
how you’ll be paid, for example cash, cheque or bank transfer
If you’re an employee or worker (not a contractor or freelancer), you have
the right to a payslip (/payslips). You can check your employment status
(/employment-status) if you’re not sure. Your payslip shows:
your earnings before and after any deductions
the amount of any deductions that may change each time you’re paid, for
example tax and National Insurance
the number of hours you worked, if your pay varies depending on time
worked
You might need to know how to work out your weekly pay if you have to
claim payments for redundancy or compensation from your employer.
Part-time workers
If you’re a part-time worker, you must get at least the same hourly pay rate
as a full-time worker doing a similar job.
2. Working out your pay
Knowing how to work out your weekly pay is important because it’s used to
calculate how much you should get for:
redundancy pay (/redundancy-your-rights/redundancy-pay) and pay during
time off for job-hunting if you’re made redundant
pay during your notice period when leaving a job
holiday pay

guarantee pay for work - you get this if your employer cannot provide you
with work but your contract says they have to pay you anyway
compensation awarded by Employment Tribunals
What you’re entitled to depends on your work status (/employment-status).
You do not need to calculate your weekly pay if you’re paid weekly and your
pay does not vary.
If your pay varies or you’re not paid weekly, you’ll need to calculate your
weekly pay. You’ll usually use a 12-week period to work it out. For holiday
pay (/holiday-entitlement-rights/holiday-pay-the-basics), use a 52-week period
instead.
The 12-week period
You can work out your weekly pay by getting an average figure for a 12week period. The particular 12 weeks you use varies depending on what
you’re calculating your pay for.
Redundancy
Use the 12 weeks up to the day you got your redundancy notice to work out
your redundancy pay (/calculate-your-redundancy-pay).
Notice pay
Use the 12 weeks up to the first day of the notice period to work out what
your notice pay should be.
Guarantee payments
Use the 12 weeks leading up to when your payment is due. If you no longer
work for that employer, use the last 12 weeks of your employment with
them.
If you’ve worked for your employer for less than 12 weeks, you should be
allowed to calculate your average weekly pay using:
the number of hours you would have worked
the hours of other workers doing a similar job for your employer

Working out your weekly figure
Add up the total amount of pay for the period and divide it by 12 to get the
weekly figure. You do this even if you’ve had to use a period of more than
12 weeks.
Bonuses and commission
You can include bonuses and commission in your calculations
(/understanding-your-pay/pay-calculations-if-you-work-shifts-or-get-bonuses) if your
contract says your employer has to pay them.
Overtime
You can include overtime in your calculations if your contract says your
employer has to pay it.
Work done for a previous employer
You can include pay for work done for a previous employer if you’re
calculating your average weekly pay and you did not have a gap in
employment when you changed jobs.
Get help with the calculations
If you need help working out a week’s pay, you can:
find advice on the Acas (Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service)
contact Citizens Advice (https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/about-us/how-weprovide-advice/advice/search-for-your-local-citizens-advice/#searchbox)
3. Pay calculations if you work shifts or
get bonuses
If your pay or working hours vary from week to week, the calculations for
working out your weekly pay are more complicated.
Bonuses and commission
Your pay could vary depending on the amount of work you do, because of:
bonuses

commission
‘piece work’ - you’re paid by the amount of work you do, rather than by
the hour
The 12-week period
If you get bonuses, commission or piece work, you’ll need to work out your
average hourly rate over a 12-week period to work out your weekly pay.
Add up your total pay for the 12 weeks first. You can include overtime,
bonuses and commission if your contract says your employer has to pay
them.
There are special calculations for bonuses.
Quarterly bonuses
You can include a proportion of your quarterly bonuses in your calculations.
1 Divide the bonus amount by 13 (the number of weeks in a quarter of a
year).
2 Multiply this figure by 12 (the number of weeks your pay is averaged
across).
Example
If you get a quarterly bonus of £260:
divide £260 by 13 weeks = £20
multiply £20 by 12 weeks = £240
You can include a bonus of £240 as part of your 12-week total.
Annual bonuses
If you get an annual bonus here’s what you need to do.

1 Divide the bonus amount by 52 (the number of weeks in a year).
2 Multiply this by 12.
Example
If you get an annual bonus of £5,200:
divide £5,200 by 52 weeks = £100 per week
multiply £100 by 12 weeks = £1,200
You can include a bonus of £1,200 as part of your 12-week total.
Hourly rate
Work out the average hourly rate by dividing the total amount you earned in
12-week period by the number of hours you worked.
Weekly rate
Multiply your hourly rate by the average number of hours you worked each
week in the 12-week period, to get your weekly rate.
Shift or rota work
Your week’s pay will be the average number of hours you work at an
average pay rate over a 12-week period.
Example
Your pay is £9 per hour and you work three 9-hour shifts, then you have
3 days off.
You’re paid £11 per hour at weekends. At the start of the 12-week
period, your first day at work is a Monday. Here’s how you work out your
pay.

1 Work out how many hours you did over the 12-week period (42 x
9-hour shifts = 378 hours).
2 Divide this by 12 to work out your average weekly hours: 378
divided by 12 = 31.5 hours.
3 Calculate your pay for the weekday shifts. You’d have worked 30
weekday 9-hour shifts at £9 per hour. 30 shifts x 9 hours = 270
hours. Multiply this by £9 to get the total you were paid for your
weekday shifts: £2,430.
4 Divide £2,430 by 12 to get the weekly figure: £202.50.
5 Calculate your pay for weekends. You’d have worked 12 weekend
9-hour shifts at £11 per hour. 12 shifts x 9 hours = 108 hours.
Multiply this by £11 to get the weekend total: £1,188.
6 Divide this by 12 to get the weekly figure: £99 per week.
7 Add the weekday and weekend figures together: £202.50 + £99 =
£301.50. This is your weekly rate.
Get help with the calculations
If you need help working out a week’s pay, you can:
find advice on the Acas (Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service)
contact Citizens Advice (https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/about-us/how-weprovide-advice/advice/search-for-your-local-citizens-advice/#searchbox)
4. Performance-related pay
Your employer should base your performance-related pay on clear,
measurable targets - they should tell you about these.
There are 2 main types of performance pay:
short-term schemes, like bonus payments or sales commission
long-term schemes, like company shares

Non-payment of bonuses or commission
If you do not get a bonus or commission you’re owed and you think there’s
been a mistake:
speak to your employer to see if there’s been a misunderstanding
ask them set out in writing how they’ve calculated your pay
keep copies of any letters and notes of any meetings
If a bonus or commission is included in your contract, non-payment is a
breach of contract. You can get help with making a complaint (/solveworkplace-dispute).
Non-payment of bonuses may also be covered legally under:
unlawful deductions from wages (/understanding-your-pay/deductions-fromyour-pay) - for example, you’re entitled to payment but it has not been
given
unlawful discrimination (/discrimination-your-rights/discrimination-at-work) -
your employer must not discriminate against particular groups, for
example giving smaller bonuses to women
If you need help, you can:
go to Acas (Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service) for advice
contact your nearest Citizens Advice
(https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/about-us/how-we-provideadvice/advice/search-for-your-local-citizens-advice/#searchbox)
talk to your trade union representative (/join-trade-union/role-of-your-tradeunion-rep)
5. Deductions from your pay
Your employer is not allowed to make deductions unless:
it’s required or allowed by law, for example National Insurance, income
tax or student loan repayments
you agree in writing
your contract says they can
there’s a statutory payment due to a public authority
you have not worked due to taking part in a strike or industrial action
there’s been an earlier overpayment of wages or expenses

the court has told your employer to take debt payments (/debt-paymentsfrom-your-wages)
A deduction cannot normally reduce your pay below the National Minimum
Wage (/national-minimum-wage-rates) even if you agree to it, except if the
deduction is for:
tax or National Insurance
something you’ve done and your contract says you’re liable for it, for
example a shortfall in your till if you work in a shop
repayment of a loan or advance of wages
repayment of an accidental overpayment of wages
buying shares or share options in the business
accommodation provided by your employer (/national-minimum-wageaccommodation)
your own use, for example union subscriptions or pension contributions
If you work in retail - for example shops, restaurants
Your employer cannot take more than 10% from your gross pay (pay before
tax and National Insurance) each pay period to cover any shortfalls.
Example
There’s a shortfall of £50 in your till and your employer wants to deduct
this from your earnings.
You’re paid £250 gross per week. Your employer can take 10% of your
gross earnings, which is £25.
They must only take £25 one week and then make another deduction
from your next pay cheque for £25.
If you leave your job, they can take the full amount owed from your final
pay.
If you have not been paid in full
Speak to your employer first to try to sort out the problem informally.
If this does not work, you can:

go to Acas (Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service) for help and
contact your nearest Citizens Advice
(https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/about-us/how-we-provideadvice/advice/search-for-your-local-citizens-advice/#searchbox)
talk to your trade union representative (https://www.gov.uk/join-tradeunion/role-of-your-trade-union-rep)
You have the right to go to an Employment Tribunal (/employmenttribunals) to get your money.
If you leave your job
Check your contract to see if your employer is allowed to withhold your pay.
Normally you’re entitled to be paid everything you’ve earned up to the point
you finish.
If you’re forced to resign because your employer refuses to pay you, you
may be able to make a constructive dismissal claim in an Employment
Tribunal (/employment-tribunals).