Employment status
1. Overview
In employment law a person’s employment status helps determine:
their rights
their employer’s responsibilities
A person may have a different employment status in tax law.
The main types of employment status are:
worker (/employment-status/worker)
employee (/employment-status/employee)
self-employed and contractor (/employment-status/selfemployed-contractor)
director (/employment-status/director)
office holder (/employment-status/office-holder)
Contact Acas (or the Labour Relations Agency (http://www.lra.org.uk/) in
Northern Ireland) for advice about employment status, employee rights or
employer responsibilities.
Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm
Find out about call charges (/call-charges)
Courts and tribunals (/employment-status/legal-decisions-on-employmentstatus) can make final decisions on employment status.
2. Worker
A person is generally classed as a ‘worker’ if:

they have a contract or other arrangement to do work or services
personally for a reward (/employment-contracts-and-conditions) (a contract
can be written or unwritten)
their reward is for money or a benefit in kind, for example the promise of
a contract or future work
they only have a limited right to send someone else to do the work
(subcontract)
their employer has to have work for them to do as long as the contract or
arrangement lasts
they are not doing the work as part of their own limited company in an
arrangement where the ‘employer’ is actually a customer or client
Employment rights
Workers are entitled to certain employment rights, including:
getting the National Minimum Wage (/national-minimum-wage)
protection against unlawful deductions from wages
the statutory minimum level of paid holiday (/holiday-entitlement-rights)
the statutory minimum length of rest breaks
to work no more than 48 hours on average per week (/maximum-weeklyworking-hours) or to opt out of this right if they choose
protection against unlawful discrimination (/discrimination-your-rights)
protection for ‘whistleblowers’ who report wrongdoing in the workplace
(/whistleblowing)
not to be treated less favourably if they work part-time
They may also be entitled to:
Statutory Sick Pay (/statutory-sick-pay)
Statutory Maternity Pay (/maternity-pay-leave)
Statutory Paternity Pay (/paternity-pay-leave)
Statutory Adoption Pay (/adoption-pay-leave)
Statutory Shared Parental Pay (/shared-parental-leave-and-pay)
Statutory Parental Bereavement Pay (/parental-bereavement-pay-leave)
Statutory Neonatal Care Pay (/neonatal-care-pay-leave)
Agency workers (/agency-workers-your-rights/overview) have specific rights

from the first day at work.
Workers usually are not entitled to:
minimum notice periods if their employment will be ending, for example if
an employer is dismissing them
protection against unfair dismissal (/dismissal/unfair-and-constructivedismissal)
the right to request flexible working (/flexible-working)
time off for emergencies (/time-off-for-dependants)
statutory redundancy pay (/redundant-your-rights/redundancy-pay)
Casual or irregular work
Someone is likely to be a worker if most of these apply:
they occasionally do work for a specific business
the business does not have to offer them work and they do not have to
accept it - they only work when they want to
their contract with the business uses terms like ‘casual’, ‘freelance’, ‘zero
hours’, ‘as required’ or something similar
they had to agree with the business’s terms and conditions to get work -
either verbally or in writing
they are under the supervision or control of a manager or director
they cannot send someone else to do their work
the business deducts tax and National Insurance contributions from their
wages
the business provides materials, tools or equipment they need to do the
work
3. Employee
An employee is someone who works under an employment contract
(/employment-contracts-and-conditions/overview).
A person may be an employee in employment law but have a different
status for tax purposes. Employers must work out each worker’s status
in both employment law and tax law.
If someone is classed as an employee for tax purposes, their employer
must tell HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) when the person starts being
an employee (/new-employee) or stops being an employee (/employee-leaving).

Employment rights
All employees are workers, but an employee has extra employment rights
and responsibilities that do not apply to workers who are not employees.
For example, workers are entitled to most types of statutory pay, but only
employees get statutory pay and leave.
Employment rights include all of the rights workers have (/employmentstatus/worker) and:
Statutory Sick Pay (/statutory-sick-pay-ssp)
statutory redundancy pay (/redundant-your-rights/redundancy-pay)
Statutory Maternity Pay and Leave (/maternity-pay-leave)
Statutory Paternity Pay and Leave (/paternity-pay-leave)
Statutory Adoption Pay and Leave (/adoption-pay-leave)
Statutory Shared Parental Pay and Leave (/shared-parental-leave-and-pay)
Statutory Parental Bereavement Pay and Leave (/parental-bereavementpay-leave)
Statutory Neonatal Care Pay and Leave (/neonatal-care-pay-leave)
minimum notice periods if their employment will be ending, for example if
an employer is dismissing them
protection against unfair dismissal (/dismissal/unfair-and-constructivedismissal)
the right to request flexible working (/flexible-working)
time off for emergencies (/time-off-for-dependants)
Some of these rights require a minimum length of continuous employment
(/continuous-employment-what-it-is) before an employee qualifies for them. An
employment contract may state how long this qualification period is.
Working out employment status for an employee
Someone who works for a business is probably an employee if most of the
following are true:
they’re required to work regularly unless they’re on leave, for example
they’re on holiday (/holiday-entitlement-rights) or on sick leave (/taking-sickleave) or on maternity leave (/maternity-leave)
they’re required to do a minimum number of hours and expect to be paid
for time worked

a manager or supervisor is responsible for their workload, saying when a
piece of work should be finished and how it should be done
they cannot send someone else to do their work
they get paid holiday
they’re entitled to contractual or Statutory Sick Pay (/statutory-sick-pay-ssp)
and to maternity pay (/statutory-maternity-pay) or to paternity pay (/paternitypay)
they can join the business’s pension scheme
the business’s disciplinary and grievance procedures apply to them
they work at the business’s premises or at an address specified by the
business
their contract sets out redundancy procedures
the business provides the materials, tools and equipment for their work
they only work for the business or if they do have another job, it’s
completely different from their work for the business
their contract, statement of terms and conditions or offer letter (which can
be described as an ‘employment contract’ (/employment-contracts-andconditions/overview)) uses terms like ‘employer’ and ‘employee’
If most of these do not apply, you should work out if the person is selfemployed (/employment-status/selfemployed-contractor).
! Individuals and their employers may have to pay unpaid tax and
penalties, or lose entitlement to benefits, if their employment
status is wrong.
Check employment status for tax purposes
For tax purposes, you can check someone’s employment status online
(/guidance/check-employment-status-for-tax) to see if a worker should be
classed as employed or self-employed.
4. Employee shareholders
An employee shareholder is someone who works under an employment
contract (/employment-contracts-and-conditions/overview) and owns at least
£2,000 worth of shares in the employer’s company or parent company.
Employment rights
Employee shareholders have most of the same employment rights as
people who are workers (/employment-status/worker) and as people who are
employees (/employment-status/employee).

They also have the right to collective redundancy consultation and transfer
protects the employee’s terms and conditions when the business is
transferred to a new owner.
Employee shareholders do not have these rights:
protection against unfair dismissal (/dismissal/unfair-and-constructivedismissal) - apart from dismissal on grounds of discrimination and in
relation to health and safety
statutory redundancy pay (/redundant-your-rights/redundancy-pay)
the right to request flexible working (/flexible-working) - except in the 2
weeks after returning from parental leave
certain statutory rights to request time off for training
Employee shareholders must give 16 weeks’ notice if they want to come
back early from:
maternity leave (/maternity-pay-leave/overview)
additional paternity leave (/paternity-pay-leave/leave)
adoption leave (/adoption-pay-leave/leave)
Employers can choose more generous employment rights than the statutory
ones.
Tax relief and obligations
Employee shareholders can get tax relief (/tax-employee-shareschemes/employee-shareholder-shares) on the first £2,000 of shares they get
before 1 December 2016.
Employee shareholders must pay tax on buying and selling shares (/taxbuying-selling-shares/selling-shares).
HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) has further guidance on tax relief for
employee shareholders (/guidance/employee-shareholders).
Applying for employment shareholder jobs
Anyone can apply for an employee shareholder job.
People claiming Jobseeker’s Allowance do not have to apply for an
employee shareholder job that Jobcentre Plus have told them about.

Existing employees do not have to accept a change to an employment
contract to become an employee shareholder if they do not want to.
Offering employment shareholder status
Employers must following certain rules when offering employment
shareholder status (/employee-shareholders) to their employees.
5. Self-employed and contractor
A person is self-employed if they run their business for themselves and take
responsibility for its success or failure.
Self-employed workers are not paid through PAYE, and they do not have
the rights and responsibilities of an employee (/employment-status/employee).
If someone:
becomes self-employed, they must check if they need to set up a
business (/set-up-business)
stops being self-employed, they should tell HM Revenue and Customs
(HMRC) (/stop-being-self-employed)
Someone can be both employed and self-employed at the same time,
for example if they work for an employer during the day and run their
own business in the evenings.
Employment rights
Employment law does not cover self-employed people in most cases
because they are their own boss.
If a person is self-employed, they have:
protection of their health and safety
protection of their rights against discrimination (/discrimination-your-rights)
(in some cases)
the rights and responsibilities set out by the terms of the contract they
have with their client
Working out if someone is self-employed
HMRC may regard someone as self-employed for tax purposes even if they
have a different status in employment law.

Employers should check if a worker is self-employed in:
tax law - in case the worker is exempt from the employer’s PAYE scheme
employment law - in case the worker has employee or worker rights
! Individuals and their employers may have to pay unpaid tax and
penalties, or lose entitlement to benefits, if their employment
status is wrong.
Checking if they’re self-employed for tax purposes
For tax purposes, you can check someone’s employment status online
(/guidance/check-employment-status-for-tax) to see if a worker should be
classed as employed or self-employed.
There are special rules for businesses supplying workers
(/guidance/employment-status-employment-intermediaries), for example an
employment agency.
Checking their employment rights
If someone is self-employed, they do not have the rights and responsibilities
of an employee (/employment-status/employee) or the rights and
responsibilities of a worker (/employment-status/worker).
Someone is probably self-employed if they’re self-employed for tax
purposes and most of the following are true:
they put in bids or give quotes to get work
they’re not under direct supervision when working
they submit invoices for the work they’ve done
they’re responsible for paying their own National Insurance and tax
they do not get holiday or sick pay when they’re not working
they operate under a contract (sometimes known as a ‘contract for
services’ or ‘consultancy agreement’) that uses terms like ‘self-employed’,
‘consultant’ or an ‘independent contractor’
Contractors
A contractor can:
be self-employed

have the employment status of a worker (/employment-status/worker)
have the employment status of an employee (/employment-status/employee)
if they work for a client and are employed by an agency
There’s a special scheme for self-employed contractors and sub-contractors
working in the construction industry called the Construction Industry
Scheme (/what-is-the-construction-industry-scheme) (CIS).
Contractor rules changed on 6 April 2021. Your employment status and
the way you pay tax may have changed. Check the off-payroll working
rules for IR35 (/guidance/understanding-off-payroll-working-ir35).
6. Director
Company directors run limited companies (/running-a-limited-company) on
behalf of shareholders.
Directors have different rights and responsibilities from employees, and are
classed as office holders (/employment-status/office-holder) for tax and
National Insurance contribution (/national-insurance-rates-letters/contributionrates) purposes.
If a person does other work that’s not related to being a director, they may
have an employment contract and get employment rights.
7. Office holder
A person who’s been appointed to a position by a company or organisation
but does not have a contract or receive regular payment may be an office
holder. This includes:
statutory appointments, such as registered company directors or
secretaries, board members of statutory bodies, or crown appointments
appointments under the internal constitution of an organisation, such as
club treasurers or trade union secretaries
appointments under a trust deed, such as trustees
ecclesiastical appointment, such as members of the clergy
Office holders are neither employees nor workers. However, it’s possible for
someone to be an office holder and an employee if they have an
employment contract with the same company or organisation that meets the
criteria for employees (/employment-status/employee).
Working out employment status for an office holder

Someone is likely to be an office holder if most of these statements apply to
them:
there is no contract or service agreement relating to their appointment
their duties are minimal, and are only those required under the relevant
statute, constitution or trust deed
they do not get a salary or any other form of regular payment for their
services
the only payment they get is a voluntary payment (honorarium),
regardless of the work they do - tax and National Insurance are deducted
by the appointing body
they’re effectively working as an independent office, and are not under
the close supervision or control of the appointing body
8. Legal decisions on employment status
A court or employment tribunal (/employment-tribunals/taking-a-case-to-anemployment-tribunal) (known as an industrial tribunal
(http://www.employmenttribunalsni.co.uk/) in Northern Ireland) can make a final
decision on employment status for employment rights purposes. They’ll look
at how the employment relationship between the person and the business
works in practice.
HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) may separately argue that someone is
self-employed for tax purposes. This may be confirmed by the tax tribunal
and the courts.
An employment tribunal or court may still make a decision that someone is
a worker or employee for employment rights purposes.