Business transfers, takeovers
and TUPE
1. Overview
When a business changes owner, its employees may be protected under
the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) regulations
(TUPE).
TUPE protection
TUPE applies to employees of businesses in the UK.
The business could have its head office in another country, but the part of
the business that’s transferring ownership must be in the UK.
The size of the business does not matter.
When TUPE applies:
the employees’ jobs usually transfer over to the new company -
exceptions could be if the employees are made redundant (/staffredundant) or in some cases where the business is insolvent (/transferstakeovers/insolvent-businesses)
their employment terms and conditions transfer
continuity of employment is maintained
To find out if TUPE applies to your transfer, talk to Acas (the Advisory,
Citizens Advice (http://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/index/getadvice.htm) or, if
you’re an employee, your trade union representative.
When TUPE applies
There are 2 types of transfer protected under TUPE regulations:
business transfers

service provision changes
Transfers within the public sector are not usually covered by TUPE but
some transfers from the public sector into the private sector are. However,
public-sector employees get similar protection. Find out more about staff
transfers in the public sector (/government/publications/staff-transfers-in-thepublic-sector).
Business transfers
This is where a business or part of a business moves from one employer to
another. This can include mergers where 2 companies close and combine
to form a new one.
The identity of the employer must change, to be protected under TUPE
during a business transfer.
Service provision changes
This is when:
a service provided in-house (for example cleaning, workplace catering) is
awarded to a contractor
a contract ends and is given to a new contractor
a contract ends and the work is transferred in-house by the former
customer
Employees are not protected under TUPE if the contract is:
for the supply of goods for the company’s use (for example a restaurant
changing food suppliers)
for a single event or short-term task (for example a catering company
being used for a large corporate event)
Only the employees who can be clearly identified as providing the service
being transferred are protected.
Example
A courier collects and delivers for a business, but the packages are
picked up or delivered by a number of different couriers on an ad hoc
basis. The courier is not protected under TUPE.

A cleaner is employed by a company that decides to use an outside
cleaning company instead. They’re likely to be protected under TUPE.
2. Consulting and informing
Before a transfer of ownership happens, employers must tell the trade union
or employee representatives:
that the transfer is happening, when it’s happening and why
how the transfer will affect them
whether there’ll be any reorganisation
how many agency workers they’re using and what types of work they are
doing
Employers can be penalised if they do not do this.
Employers must consult employee representatives about anything to do
with the transfer that would affect the employees (for example
reorganisation). They should try to gain agreement about these
changes.
Trade union representatives
If there’s a trade union in the workplace, the employer must inform and
consult with the representatives from the union.
Employee representatives
If there’s no trade union the employer must inform and consult other
employee representatives.
If there are no employee representatives
Employers can inform and consult directly with their employees if they have
fewer than 10 employees.
For transfers completing on or after 1 July 2024, employers can inform and
consult directly with their employees if they either:
have fewer than 50 employees
are transferring fewer than 10 employees
Otherwise, there must be an election to select employee representatives.

Electing employee representatives
The employer should:
make sure the election is fair
decide how many people are needed to represent the interests of
everyone affected
decide if affected employees should be represented as one workforce or
in groups
decide how long the representatives need to be in place
They should also make sure that:
the employee representatives are people who are affected by the transfer
no affected employee is unreasonably excluded from standing for election
all affected employees at the time of the election are entitled to vote
employees can vote for as many candidates as there are positions to be
filled
if possible, voting is done in secret
votes are accurately counted
If you’re an employee representative you have the same rights as a trade
union representative (/rights-of-trade-union-reps) to help you carry out your
role.
3. Transfers of employment contracts
Under TUPE, the new employer takes over employees’ employment
contracts, including:
all the previous terms and conditions of employment
any failures of the previous employer to observe employees’ rights (so
employees could make a claim for discrimination against the new
employer, even if it took place before the transfer)
holiday entitlement (/holiday-entitlement-rights)
period of continuous employment (/continuous-employment-what-it-is) - an
employee’s start date is the same as before the transfer, so continuous
employment is not broken
any collective agreements previously made
It’s a breach of contract if the new employer does not meet the terms of
the employment contract.

If an employee does not want to work for the new
employer
Employees can refuse to work for the new employer. This is the same as
resigning - they will not normally be able to claim unfair dismissal or
redundancy pay.
Notice is not required. The employee simply tells the employer, or the new
employer, before the transfer happens. Employment then ends at the time
of transfer.
If an employee’s working conditions are significantly worse because of
the transfer, they can object to the transfer, or resign and claim unfair
dismissal.
Changing an employment contract
TUPE regulations mean employees should not lose their existing
employment rights.
Before the transfer
If the employer knows an employee is transferring to another company, they
cannot normally change the employee’s terms and conditions to make them
the same as those of the new company - even if the employee agrees to the
change.
After the transfer
The new employer cannot change an employee’s terms and conditions if
the reason is the transfer itself.
The new employer can change an employee’s terms and conditions if the
reason is an ‘economic, technical or organisational reason’ (ETO) involving
changes in the workforce or workplace, such as a result of redundancies or
a move from a managerial to a non-managerial position. The employee
needs to agree to this change.
‘Economic’ reasons are to do with how the company is performing.
‘Technical’ reasons are to do with the equipment or processes the company
uses.

‘Organisational’ reasons are to do with the structure of the company.
Employers can make changes if the employee’s existing contract allows
for those changes. But the transfer itself cannot be the reason for
change.
Positive changes
Employers can improve employees’ terms and conditions if they agree. For
example, they might want to increase the amount of holiday so that it’s the
same for everyone.
An employer cannot normally impose changes - they have to be agreed by
the employees or their representatives.
Dismissals
Employers can dismiss employees for an ETO reason involving changes in
the workforce, for example redundancies. The normal rules around fair
dismissals will still apply.
Collective agreements
Collective agreements in place before the date of the transfer will apply.
Collective agreements from the date of transfer will not apply if the new
employer has not taken part in the process.
Employers can renegotiate terms and conditions in collective agreements
after 1 year if the change is not less favourable to the employee.
Pension rights
Employees’ company pension rights earned up to the time of a transfer are
protected, but the new employer does not have to continue an identical
pension.
After the transfer
When the transfer is complete, employees should make sure they get an
up-to-date written statement of employment, giving the name of the new
employer and saying that their terms and conditions have not changed.

Employees might get a P45 if their tax records are being updated.
4. Redundancy
The new employer cannot make employees redundant (/redundant-yourrights) just because they were transferred from another employer.
The new employer can consult about redundancies before the transfer if the
old employer agrees.
If an employee is made redundant for an ‘economic, organisational or
technical’ (/transfers-takeovers/transfers-of-employment-contracts) reason
involving changes to the workforce, they may be entitled to a redundancy
payment.
Example
After a transfer, a new employer has to close down part of a company
because it’s not performing. This means the business does not need
people with a certain specialist skill, and therefore makes an employee
redundant. The employee could be entitled to a redundancy payment.
5. Information about employees during
transfers
An employer must provide the new employer with information about
employees. This normally includes:
name
age
main details of employment
disciplinary action taken against employees in the last 2 years
grievances raised by employees (/raise-grievance-at-work) in the last 2
years
legal action (/employment-tribunals) taken by employees against the
employer in the last 2 years
potential legal action the employer thinks employees might raise
The employer must provide the information at least 4 weeks before the
transfer.
6. Insolvent businesses

If the employer is insolvent (/your-rights-if-your-employer-is-insolvent) and the
business is being transferred or taken over by another company, the
protection employees get is different from in a normal transfer.
The employees are unlikely to be protected under TUPE if the business is
closing down. However, TUPE regulations will normally apply if it’s being
rescued and taken over or transferred.
If employees are owed money
Employees have rights if their employer is insolvent (/your-rights-if-youremployer-is-insolvent) and owes them money. Employees can claim for this
whether they’re protected under TUPE or not.
In a TUPE-protected transfer, the new employer must pay any amount left
over after employees have been paid from the government’s National
Insurance fund.
Changes to employees’ terms and conditions
Employees’ pay can be reduced or their other terms and conditions
(/employment-contracts-and-conditions) changed after the transfer. This is
allowed if it will prevent job losses.
Any changes must be agreed with employee or trade union representatives.
Any agreement cannot break statutory employment rights. For example,
employees cannot be paid below the National Minimum Wage (/nationalminimum-wage).
7. Employees working abroad
Employees of a UK business who are based outside the UK could still be
protected by TUPE.
In business transfers, if a business has an ‘undertaking’ in the UK (for
example building, assets, fixtures and fittings, employees) but an employee
spends most of the working week outside the UK, it’s likely they’re
protected.
In service provision changes, there must be an organised group of
employees in England, Scotland or Wales to qualify for TUPE protection.
Example
A team is doing website maintenance under a contract that’s coming to
an end and someone else is taking it over.

If the contract is performed in the UK, but one team member works from
home in a country other than England, Scotland and Wales, it’s likely
they’re protected.
If the whole team works from home in a country other than England,
Scotland or Wales, the members would not be protected as there’s no
organised group of employees in one of those countries.
8. Help and advice
Both employers and employees can get confidential help and advice on
employment rights from Acas (the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Employees can also talk to Citizens Advice
(http://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/index/getadvice.htm) or their trade union
representative.
For more detailed information, read Employment rights on the transfer of an
undertaking (/government/publications/tupe-a-guide-to-the-2006-regulations).
Employment tribunals
If an employee feels they have been dismissed unfairly, or feel forced to
resign, they may be able to complain to an employment tribunal
(/employment-tribunals).