Your rights as an agency worker
1. When you're an agency worker
You’re an agency worker if you have a contract with an agency but you work
temporarily for a hirer. Agencies can include recruitment agencies, for
example ‘temp agencies’.
You’re also an agency worker if you look for work through entertainment and
modelling agencies .
You’re not an agency worker if you use an agency to find permanent or
fixed-term employment.

2. Fees
Recruitment agencies cannot charge you a fee for finding or trying to find
you work.
They can charge you for certain services, for example CV writing, training or
transport. You have the right to cancel these as long as you give notice.
If any agency offers you services it:
must give you full written details of the fee and conditions before charging
you - including details of your right to cancel and the notice period
cannot make you use these services as a condition for finding you work
There are different rules for entertainment and modelling agencies.

When you want to cancel a service
You can cancel paid services without a penalty. You must give a minimum
of:
10 working days’ written notice to the agency to cancel living
accommodation
5 working days’ notice for all other services, such as training courses

3. What your agency must give you
Your agency must give you information about the work they’re trying to find
you.
Before you’re offered a job
Before looking for work for you, your agency must give you:
a key information document
written terms of engagement - often known as a contract
Key information document
The key information document is a short explanation of how you’ll be paid
and what deductions will be applied.
It must include:
the minimum rate of pay you can expect
a sample payslip giving an estimate of your take home pay after things
like National Insurance, Income Tax or private healthcare
who is paying you
if you have any fees to pay
if you’re entitled to any benefits
Your agency does not have to give you a key information document if
you’ve already agreed terms of engagement with them before 6 April
2020.
Terms of engagement
The written terms of engagement should include:
whether you’re employed under a contract for services or a contract of
employment
your notice period
your pay
your holiday entitlement
An agency cannot change your terms and conditions without telling you. If
you agree to changes, you must be given a new document with the full
details of the changes and the date they changed.
An agency cannot give information about you to any third parties
(including current employers or hirers) without your permission.
When you’re offered a job
The agency must give you a written statement that tells you:
your start date
how long the contract is likely to last
the type of work
about any expenses you may have to pay
the location
your hours
about any health and safety risks
about any experience, training or qualifications needed for the role

4. Equal treatment
From the day you start work you have a worker’s employment rights.
You also have the same rights as your permanent colleagues to use any
shared facilities and services provided by your employer, for example:
a canteen or food and drinks machines
a workplace creche or mother and baby room
car parking or transport services, like a local pick-up service or transport
between sites

Rights after 12 weeks
After 12 weeks in the job you qualify for the same rights as someone
employed directly. This is known as ‘equal treatment’.
Your rights include:
‘equal pay’ - the same pay as a permanent colleague doing the same job
automatic pension enrolment
paid annual leave
How to count your 12 week period
Start counting your 12 week qualifying period from your first day at work.
You do not have to be at work for 12 weeks in a row - some types of leave
count and there can be breaks.
Do not count days on sick leave or a break
The qualifying period will pause for sick leave or breaks. Do not count the
days when:
you take a break of 6 weeks or less
you’re on leave due to sickness or injury for up to 28 weeks
you take annual leave you’re entitled to
the workplace closes, for example for Christmas or industrial action
you’re on jury service for up to 28 weeks
Count time off for pregnancy, paternity or adoption
Your 12 week qualifying period will continue through time off you have for:
pregnancy and up to 26 weeks after childbirth 
adoption leave
paternity leave
If your leave is more than 12 weeks you’ll qualify for equal treatment when
you return to work.

Start from zero for a new job or role
Your 12 weeks will start again if you:
get a new job at a different workplace
have a break of more than 6 weeks between jobs at the same workplace
stay at your workplace but take a new role that’s ‘substantively different’
A substantively different role is one that’s completely new, different work. It
could be a combination of different:
skills, or requiring new training
pay rate
location
working hours

5. Pay
You’re entitled to the National Minimum Wage  for all the hours you work, even if you have not
recorded them on a timesheet.
After 12 weeks  you’re entitled to be paid the same as a permanent employee doing
the same job.
If your agency withholds your pay
Your agency can delay paying you while they get proof of the hours you
worked, but only for a reasonable period of time.
Your agency cannot refuse to pay you because your hirer’s unhappy with
your work - this is a contractual issue between your agency and the hirer.
You can make a claim to an employment tribunal  if
your agency is refusing to pay you.
If you’ve opted out of the right to equal pay
Your agency should contact you to explain that after 12 weeks you’re
entitled to the same pay as a permanent employee doing the same job.

6. Maternity rights
You may be able to get Statutory Maternity Pay, but you cannot get Statutory Maternity Leave.
As an agency worker, you have employee’s pregnancy rights  after working in your role for 12 weeks.
It’s illegal to discriminate against you on the grounds that:
you’re pregnant
you’ve given birth in the last 6 months
you’re breastfeeding
It’s discrimination if your:
agency refuses to place you in a job
hirer refuses to hire you
job was terminated because you’re pregnant
agency refuses to keep you on its books
agency offers you only short jobs and gives longer ones to other agency
workers
hirer will not let you come back after having leave due to maternity
If there’s a risk to your health
Your hirer should make reasonable adjustments so you can do your job. If
this isn’t possible your agency must find you alternative work or pay you at
the same rate for the expected length of your contract.
Antenatal care
After 12 weeks in the job  you can get paid time off to go to ‘antenatal care’ if
you cannot arrange it outside working hours.
Antenatal care includes antenatal classes, appointments and parenting
classes if they’ve been recommended by a doctor or midwife.
You must also be paid for the travel time if it’s during working hours.

7. Entertainment agencies
Entertainment agencies can charge you a fee:
for finding you work, for example taking a commission (percentage fee)
from your earnings
to publish your details online or in a publication
They must tell you in writing if a fee is involved.
If they’re publishing your details
Once you receive the contract, you have a 30-day ‘cooling off’ period when
you:
can cancel or withdraw from it without getting a penalty
do not have to pay
The agency must show you what it plans to publish about you before it’s
published.
You then have up to 7 days after the cooling off period to say if you do not
want the information to be published. If you’re happy, you must pay after the
7 days.
Example
You’ve paid to be promoted on a casting agency’s website. The agency
shows you the photos 29 days after you signed the contract and you’re
not happy with them. You have 8 days to demand a refund.
If the agency charged you but did not publish your name, you have the right
to a refund for up to 60 days.

8. Modelling agencies
Fashion and photographic model agencies can charge you a fee for finding
you work. They can take a commission (percentage fee) from your
earnings.
They can also charge a fee to publish your details online or in a publication.
They cannot charge this fee to you upfront but they can take it from your

earnings if they find you work.
They must tell you in writing if a fee is involved.
