Rest breaks at work
1. Overview
Workers over 18 are usually entitled to 3 types of break:
rest breaks at work
daily rest
weekly rest
Rest breaks at work
Workers have the right to one uninterrupted 20 minute rest break during
their working day, if they work more than 6 hours a day. This could be a tea
or lunch break.
The break does not have to be paid - it depends on their employment
contract.
Daily rest
Workers have the right to 11 hours rest between working days. For
example, if they finish work at 8pm, they should not start work again until
7am the next day.
Weekly rest
Workers have the right to either:
an uninterrupted 24 hours without any work each week
an uninterrupted 48 hours without any work each fortnight
A worker’s employment contract may say they’re entitled to more or
different rights to breaks from work.
Work that puts health and safety at risk

An employer should give an employee enough breaks to make sure their
health and safety is not at risk if that work is ‘monotonous’ (for example,
work on a production line).
Domestic workers in a private house (for example, a cleaner or au pair) are
not entitled to rest breaks for health and safety reasons.
2. Taking breaks
Employers can say when employees take rest breaks during work time as
long as:
the break is taken in one go somewhere in the middle of the day (not at
the beginning or end)
workers are allowed to spend it away from their desk or workstation (this
means away from where they actually work)
It does not count as a rest break if an employer says an employee should
go back to work before their break is finished.
Unless a worker’s employment contract says so, they do not have the right
to:
take smoking breaks
get paid for rest breaks
Exceptions and special circumstances
There are exemptions (/rest-breaks-work/exceptions) to the rights to rest
breaks.
Some workers are entitled to compensatory rest breaks (/rest-breakswork/compensatory-rest), for example, shift workers.
Young people (/rest-breaks-work/young-workers) and lorry and coach drivers
(/drivers-hours) have different rights to rest breaks.
3. Compensatory rest
Workers may be entitled to ‘compensatory rest’ if they do not have the right
to specific rest breaks. Compensatory rest breaks are the same length of
time as the break (or part of it) that they’ve missed.
A worker may be entitled to compensatory rest if:
they’re a shift worker and cannot take daily or weekly rest breaks
between ending one shift and starting another

their workplace is a long way from their home (for example, an oil rig)
they work in different places which are a reasonable distance from each
other
they’re doing security and surveillance-based work
they’re working in an industry which is very busy at certain times of the
year – like agriculture, retail, postal services or tourism
they need to work because there’s an exceptional event, an accident or a
risk that an accident is about to happen
the job needs round-the-clock staffing so there are no interruptions to any
services or production (for example, hospital work)
they work in the rail industry on board trains or their job is linked to
making sure trains run on time
their working day is split up (for example, they’re a cleaner and work for
part of the morning and the evening)
there is an agreement between management, trade unions or the
workforce (a ‘collective’ or ‘workforce’ agreement) that has changed or
removed rights to these rest breaks for a group of workers
The total rest entitlement for a week is 90 hours a week on average -
this does not include breaks at work, which are additional.
4. Exceptions
Workers are not entitled to the 3 general types of rest break (/rest-breakswork) if they work in:
the armed forces, emergency services or police and they’re dealing with
an exceptional catastrophe or disaster
a job where they freely choose what hours they work (like a managing
director) or where the work is not measured (for example, no set hours)
sea transport
air or road transport (known as ‘mobile’ workers)
Air, sea or road transport workers may be covered by special rules that give
them different rest rights.
Mobile workers not covered by any special rules usually have the right to
regular rest so that their health and safety (or anyone else’s) is not put at
risk.
There are also special rules for young workers (/rest-breaks-work/youngworkers) and for lorry and coach drivers (/drivers-hours).

5. Young workers
Young workers (above school leaving age (/know-when-you-can-leave-school)
and under 18) are usually entitled to:
a 30 minute rest break if they work more than 4.5 hours (if possible this
should be one continuous break)
daily rest of 12 hours
weekly rest of 48 hours
Exceptions for young workers
Young workers sometimes are not entitled to daily rest or rest breaks at
work if their work has to be done because of an exceptional event (for
example, an accident).
This is only where:
there is no worker over 18 who can do the work
the work is temporary and must be done immediately
Compensatory rest for young workers
Young workers have the right to compensatory rest (/rest-breakswork/compensatory-rest) if they are not entitled to daily rest or rest breaks at
work. This is the same amount of rest that they should have had. It can be
taken just after any rest they’ve missed but it must be taken within the
following 3 weeks.
6. Disputes
Workers who cannot take or are not allowed rest breaks should speak to
their manager informally.
Get more information for employees who want to raise a grievance
(/raise-grievance-at-work) or advice for employers on handling grievances
(/handling-employee-grievance) if there is a disagreement about rest
breaks.

If a worker cannot solve a problem, they may be able to make a claim to an
employment tribunal. (/employment-tribunals)