Statutory Sick Pay (SSP)
1. Overview
You can get £118.75 per week Statutory Sick Pay (SSP) if you’re too ill to
work. It’s paid by your employer for up to 28 weeks.
This guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg) (/tal-salwch-statudol).
You cannot get less than the statutory amount. You can get more if your
company has a sick pay scheme (or ‘occupational scheme’) - check your
employment contract.
There are different sick pay rules for agricultural workers (/agriculturalsick-pay).
There’s a separate guide on Statutory Sick Pay if you’re an employer
(/employers-sick-pay).
2. What you'll get
If you’re eligible, you can get £118.75 a week Statutory Sick Pay (SSP) for
up to 28 weeks.
You’ll be paid SSP for all the days you’re off sick that you normally would
have worked, except for the first 3.
You’ll only be paid SSP for the first 3 working days you are off sick if you
received SSP within the last 8 weeks. This must have included a 3-day
waiting period before you were paid SSP.
How you’re paid
SSP is paid by your employer in the same way as your normal wages, for
example weekly or monthly.

If you have more than one job you may get SSP from each employer.
Tax and National Insurance will be deducted.
If you think you are not getting the right amount of SSP, talk to your
employer. If you’re still not happy, contact the HM Revenue and Customs
(HMRC) enquiry line (/government/organisations/hm-revenuecustoms/contact/national-insurance-enquiries-for-employees-and-individuals).
3. Eligibility
To qualify for Statutory Sick Pay (SSP) you must:
be classed as an employee (/employment-status/employee) and have done
some work for your employer
earn an average of at least £125 per week
have been ill for more than 3 days in a row (including non-working days)
Agency workers are entitled to Statutory Sick Pay.
Telling your employer
You must usually tell your employer you’re unable to work before the
deadline they set (or within 7 days if they have not set one).
You could lose some of your SSP if you do not tell your employer in time.
Exceptions
You will not qualify if you:
have received the maximum amount of SSP (28 weeks)
are getting Statutory Maternity Pay
You can still qualify if you started your job recently and you have not
received 8 weeks’ pay yet. Ask your employer to find out more.
Linked periods of sickness
If you have regular periods of sickness, they may count as ‘linked’. To be
linked, the periods must:
last more than 3 days in a row
be 8 weeks or less apart

You’re no longer eligible for SSP if you have a continuous series of linked
periods that lasts more than 3 years.
Fit notes and asking for proof
You must give your employer a fit note if you’re off work for more than 7
days in a row (including non-working days).
You can get a fit note (sometimes called a sick note) from the following
healthcare professionals:
GP or hospital doctor
registered nurse
occupational therapist
pharmacist
physiotherapist
The note can be printed or digital.
Other proof of sickness
If your employer agrees, you can get a similar document from a
physiotherapist, podiatrist or occupational therapist instead of a fit note. This
is called an Allied Health Professional (AHP) Health and Work Report.
A physiotherapist or occupational therapist will give you either a fit note or
an AHP Health and Work Report depending on your needs.
If you’re not eligible or your SSP ends
You may be able to apply for Universal Credit (/universal-credit) or
Employment and Support Allowance (ESA) (/employment-support-allowance).
You can use form SSP1 (/government/publications/statutory-sick-pay-employeenot-entitled-form-for-employers) to support your application.
If your SSP is ending your employer must send you form SSP1 either:
within 7 days of your SSP ending, if it ends unexpectedly while you’re still
sick
on or before the beginning of the 23rd week, if your SSP is expected to
end before your sickness does
If you do not qualify for SSP your employer must send you form SSP1
within 7 days of your first day off sick.

4. How to claim
To claim Statutory Sick Pay (SSP), tell your employer by the deadline
(/statutory-sick-pay/eligibility).
Check with your employer how you should tell them. If your employer needs
something in writing you can use form SC2 (/government/publications/statutorysick-pay-employees-statement-of-sickness-sc2).
If you’re unhappy with a decision
Talk to your employer if you think:
their decision not to pay you SSP is wrong
you’re not getting the right amount of SSP
You can ask them for a reason.
If this does not sort the problem, contact the HMRC Statutory Payment
Disputes Team (/government/organisations/hm-revenue-customs/contact/statutorypayment-dispute-team).