Unpaid parental leave

1. Overview
Eligible employees can take unpaid parental leave to look after their child’s
welfare, for example to:
spend more time with their children
look at new schools
settle children into new childcare arrangements
spend more time with family, such as visiting grandparents
Their employment rights  (like the right to pay,
holidays and returning to a job) are protected during parental leave.

2. Entitlement
Parental leave is unpaid. You’re entitled to 18 weeks’ leave for each child
and adopted child, up to their 18th birthday.
The limit on how much parental leave each parent can take in a year is 4
weeks for each child (unless the employer agrees otherwise).
You must take parental leave as whole weeks (for example 1 week or 2
weeks) rather than individual days, unless your employer agrees otherwise
or if your child is disabled. You do not have to take all the leave at once.
A ‘week’ equals the length of time an employee normally works over 7 days.
Example
If an employee works 3 days a week, one ‘week’ of parental leave
equals 3 days. If an employee works irregular weeks the number of days
in a ‘week’ is the total number of days they work a year divided by 52.
Carrying leave over from a previous job
Parental leave applies to each child, not to an individual’s job.

Example
An employee is entitled to 18 weeks. They’ve used 10 with a previous
employer. They can use up to 8 weeks with their new employer if they’re
eligible .

3. Eligibility
Employees qualify if all of these apply:
they’ve been in the company for more than a year
they’re named on the child’s birth or adoption certificate or they have or
expect to have parental responsibility 
they’re not self-employed or a ‘worker’, for example an agency worker or
contractor
they’re not a foster parent (unless they’ve secured parental responsibility
through the courts)
the child is under 18
Employers can ask for proof (like a birth certificate) as long as it’s
reasonable to do so - for example they cannot ask for proof each time an
employee requests leave.
Employers can choose to offer parental leave to those groups who are not
eligible. Employees can check this in their staff handbook.

4. Notice period
Employees must give 21 days’ notice before their intended start date. If they
or their partner are having a baby or adopting, it’s 21 days before the week
the baby or child is expected.
Employees must confirm the start and end dates in their notice. Unless an
employer requests it, this does not have to be in writing.

5. Delaying leave
Leave cannot be postponed (delayed) if:
the employer does not have a ‘significant reason’, for example it would
cause serious disruption to the business
it’s being taken by the father or partner immediately after the birth or
adoption of a child

it means an employee would no longer qualify for parental leave, for
example postponing it until after the child’s 18th birthday
If it’s postponed, the employer:
must write explaining why within 7 days of the original request
must suggest a new start date - this must be within 6 months of the
requested start date
cannot change the amount of leave being requested