Part of
Employ someone: step by step
(/employ-someone)
Employment contracts
1. Overview
All employees have an employment contract with their employer. A contract
is an agreement that sets out an employee’s:
employment conditions
rights
responsibilities
duties
These are called the ‘terms’ of the contract.
Employees and employers must stick to a contract until it ends (for
example, by an employer or employee giving notice or an employee being
dismissed) or until the terms are changed (usually by agreement between
the employee and employer).
If a person has an agreement to do some work for someone (like paint
their house), this is not an employment contract but a ‘contract to
provide services’.
Find out more about employment contracts
Conciliation and Arbitration Service) website.
Accepting a contract
As soon as someone accepts a job offer they have a contract with their
employer. An employment contract does not have to be written down.
2. Contract terms

The legal parts of a contract are known as ‘terms’. An employer should
make clear which parts of a contract are legally binding.
Contract terms could be:
in a written contract, or similar document like a written statement of
employment
verbally agreed
in an employee handbook or on a company notice board
in an offer letter from the employer
required by law (for example, an employer must pay employees at least
the National Minimum Wage)
in collective agreements (/employment-contracts-and-conditions/collectiveagreements) - negotiated agreements between employers and trade
unions or staff associations
implied terms - automatically part of a contract even if they’re not written
down
Implied terms
If there’s nothing clearly agreed between you and your employer about a
particular issue, it may be covered by an implied term - for example:
employees not stealing from their employer
your employer providing a safe and secure working environment
a legal requirement like the right to the minimum holiday entitlement
(/holiday-entitlement-rights)
something necessary to do the job like a driver having a valid licence
something that’s been done regularly in a company over a long time like
paying a Christmas bonus
3. Collective agreements
An employer may have an agreement with employees’ representatives
(from trade unions or staff associations) that allows negotiations of terms
and conditions like pay or working hours. This is called a collective
agreement.
The terms of the agreement could include:
how negotiations will be organised
who will represent employees
which employees are covered by the agreement

which terms and conditions the agreement will cover
4. Written statement of employment
particulars
An employer must give employees and workers (/employment-status) a
document stating the main conditions of employment when they start work.
This is known as a ‘written statement of employment particulars’. It is not an
employment contract.
The written statement is made up of:
the main document (known as a ‘principal statement’)
a wider written statement
The employer must provide the principal statement on the first day of
employment and the wider written statement within 2 months of the start
of employment.
Employers must tell employees or workers about any changes to the written
statement. They must do this within one month of making the change.
There are special rules for agencies on documents that they need to
provide to agency workers (/agency-workers-your-rights/basic-informationyou-should-receive).
The principal statement
The principal statement must include at least:
the employer’s name
the employee’s or worker’s name, job title or a description of work and
start date
how much and how often an employee or worker will get paid
hours and days of work and if and how they may vary (also if employees
or workers will have to work on Sundays (/sunday-working), during the
‘night period’ (/night-working-hours) or take overtime (/overtime-yourrights/overview))
holiday entitlement (/holiday-entitlement-rights) (and if that includes public
holidays)
where an employee or worker will be working and whether they might
have to relocate (/employer-relocation-your-rights)

if an employee or worker works in different places, where these will be
and what the employer’s address is
how long a job is expected to last (and what the end date is if it’s a fixedterm contract)
how long any probation period is and what its conditions are
any other benefits (for example, childcare vouchers and lunch)
obligatory training, whether or not this is paid for by the employer
For employees, it must also include the date that a previous job started if it
counts towards a period of continuous employment.
Working abroad
If an employee or worker has to work outside the UK for more than a month,
the principal statement must also include:
how long they’ll be abroad
what currency they’ll be paid in
what additional pay or benefits they’ll get
terms relating to their return to the UK
Other information the employer must give on day one
On the first day of employment the employer must also provide the
employee or worker with information about:
sick pay and procedures
other paid leave (for example, maternity leave and paternity leave)
notice periods
The employer can choose whether to include this information in the principal
statement or provide it in a separate document. If they provide it in a
separate document, this must be something that the employee or worker
has reasonable access to, such as on the employer’s intranet.
The wider written statement
Employers must give employees and workers a wider written statement
within 2 months of the start of employment. This must include information
about:
pensions and pension schemes

collective agreements (/employment-contracts-and-conditions/collectiveagreements)
any other right to non-compulsory training provided by the employer
disciplinary and grievance procedures
5. Problems with a written statement
If an employee or worker has a problem receiving their written statement,
they can:
1 Try to solve the problem with their employer informally.
2 If this does not work, take out a grievance (/raise-grievance-at-work)
against their employer (employers can also get advice about handling
grievances).
3 Take a case to an employment tribunal (/employment-tribunals/taking-acase-to-an-employment-tribunal) as a last resort.
The tribunal will decide what the employment particulars in the statement
should have been.
Compensation
If an employee or worker wins a case about another issue (for example,
unauthorised deductions from their wage slip), the tribunal may award
compensation if there’s been a problem with their written statement as well.
Compensation can be up to 4 weeks’ pay although there’s a limit on how
much a tribunal will award for a week’s pay.