Discrimination: your rights
1. Types of discrimination ('protected
characteristics')
It is against the law to discriminate against anyone because of:
age
gender reassignment
being married or in a civil partnership
being pregnant (/working-when-pregnant-your-rights) or on maternity leave
disability (/definition-of-disability-under-equality-act-2010)
race including colour, nationality, ethnic or national origin
religion or belief
sex
sexual orientation
These are called ‘protected characteristics’.
You’re protected from discrimination:
at work
in education
as a consumer
when using public services
when buying or renting property
as a member or guest of a private club or association
You’re legally protected from discrimination by the Equality Act 2010
(http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents).
You’re also protected from discrimination if:
you’re associated with someone who has a protected characteristic, for
example a family member or friend

you’ve complained about discrimination or supported someone else’s
claim
Action against discrimination
You can do something voluntarily to help people with a protected
characteristic. This is called ‘positive action’.
Taking positive action is legal if people with a protected characteristic:
are at a disadvantage
have particular needs
are under-represented in an activity or type of work
2. How you can be discriminated against
Discrimination can come in one of the following forms:
direct discrimination - treating someone with a protected characteristic
less favourably than others
indirect discrimination - putting rules or arrangements in place that apply
to everyone, but that put someone with a protected characteristic at an
unfair disadvantage
harassment - unwanted behaviour linked to a protected characteristic that
violates someone’s dignity or creates an offensive environment for them
victimisation - treating someone unfairly because they’ve complained
about discrimination or harassment
It can be lawful to have specific rules or arrangements in place, as long
as they can be justified.
3. Discrimination at work
The law protects you against discrimination at work, including:
dismissal
employment terms and conditions
pay and benefits
promotion and transfer opportunities
training
recruitment

redundancy
Some forms of discrimination are only allowed if they’re needed for the way
the organisation works, for example:
a Roman Catholic school restricting applications for admission of pupils to
Catholics only
employing only women in a health centre for Muslim women
Disability
If you’re disabled you have the same rights as other workers. Employers
should also make ‘reasonable adjustments’ to help disabled employees and
job applicants with:
application forms, for example providing forms in Braille or audio formats
aptitude tests, for example giving extra time to complete the tests
dismissal or redundancy
discipline and grievances
interview arrangements, such as providing wheelchair access,
communicator support
making sure the workplace has the right facilities and equipment for
disabled workers or someone offered a job
promotion, transfer and training opportunities
terms of employment, including pay
work-related benefits like access to recreation or refreshment facilities
What you can do
If you’re discriminated against at work there are ways to deal with it
(/discrimination-your-rights/what-you-can-do).
Employers have to follow the law on preventing discrimination at work
(/employer-preventing-discrimination).
Other types of unfair treatment
You’re also protected from being treated unfairly because of:
trade union membership (/join-trade-union/trade-union-membership-youremployment-rights) or non-membership

being a fixed-term (/fixed-term-contracts) or part-time worker (/part-timeworker-rights)
4. What you can do
If you think you’ve been unfairly discriminated against you can:
complain directly to the person or organisation
use someone else to help you sort it out (called ‘mediation’ or ‘alternative
dispute resolution’)
make a claim in a court or tribunal
Contact the Equality Advisory Support Service (/equality-advisory-supportservice) for help and advice.
Discrimination at work
Employees should talk to their employer first to try and sort out the problem
informally. You may also want to read about workplace disputes (/solveworkplace-dispute).
If things cannot be sorted out informally, talk to Acas
(http://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/index/getadvice.htm) or a trade union
representative.
You might be able to take a claim to an employment tribunal
(/employment-tribunals) for discrimination.
Check if you can get legal aid (/check-legal-aid) to help with your legal costs if
you think you’ve been discriminated against. You can get advice from Civil
Legal Advice if you’re eligible.
Employers must follow the law on preventing discrimination at work
(/employer-preventing-discrimination).