Whistleblowing for employees
1. What is a whistleblower
You’re a whistleblower if you’re a worker and you report certain types of
wrongdoing. This will usually be something you’ve seen at work - though not
always.
Reporting a wrongdoing is also known as making a ‘whistleblowing
disclosure’ or ‘protected disclosure’.
The wrongdoing you disclose must be in the public interest. This means it
must affect others, for example the general public.
As a whistleblower you’re protected by law - you should not be treated
unfairly or lose your job (/whistleblowing/treated-unfairly-after-whistleblowing)
because you ‘blow the whistle’.
You can raise your concern at any time about an incident that happened in
the past, is happening now, or you believe will happen in the near future.
Who is protected by law
You’re protected if you’re a worker (/employment-status/worker), for example
you’re:
an employee, such as a police officer, NHS employee, office worker,
factory worker
a trainee, such as a student nurse
an agency worker
a member of a Limited Liability Partnership (/business-legalstructures/limited-partnership-and-limited-liability-partnership) (LLP)
Get independent advice if you’re not sure you’re protected, for example
from Citizens’ Advice (http://www.adviceguide.org.uk/).
Confidentiality or gagging clauses
Confidentiality clauses or ‘gagging clauses’ (for example in an employment
contract or settlement agreement) might try to prevent you from revealing

information about your workplace. These are sometimes called nondisclosure agreements.
These clauses are not valid if:
you’re a worker
they try to prevent you from making a whistleblowing disclosure
(sometimes known as a ‘protected disclosure’)
You might make this disclosure to a lawyer, your employer or a prescribed
person or body (/whistleblowing/who-to-tell-what-to-expect).
A confidentiality clause within a settlement agreement could however still be
valid if it’s trying to prevent you from making another kind of disclosure.
Talk to your legal adviser before you enter into a settlement agreement,
or any other agreement that has a confidentiality clause, if you want to
tell someone about wrongdoing.
Complaints that count as whistleblowing
You’re protected by law if you report any of the following:
a criminal offence, for example fraud
someone’s health and safety is in danger
risk or actual damage to the environment
a miscarriage of justice
the company is breaking the law, for example does not have the right
insurance
you believe someone is covering up wrongdoing
Complaints that do not count as whistleblowing
Personal grievances (for example bullying, harassment, discrimination) are
not covered by whistleblowing law, unless your particular case is in the
public interest.
Report these under your employer’s grievance policy (/solve-workplacedispute).
Contact the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas)

dispute.
2. Who to tell and what to expect
You can tell your employer - they may have a whistleblowing policy that tells
you what to expect if you report your concern to them. You can still report
your concern to them if they do not have a policy.
There are other options if you do not want to report your concern to your
employer, for example you can get legal advice (/find-a-legal-adviser) from a
lawyer, or tell a prescribed person or body (/government/publications/blowingthe-whistle-list-of-prescribed-people-and-bodies--2).
If you tell a prescribed person or body, it must be one that deals with the
issue you’re raising, for example a disclosure about wrongdoing in a care
home can be made to the Care Quality Commission.
There’s a different whistleblowing process in Northern Ireland
(http://www.nidirect.gov.uk/protection-of-whistleblowers).
Making your claim anonymously or confidentially
You can tell your employer or a prescribed person anonymously but they
may not be able to take the claim further if you have not provided all the
information they need.
You can give your name but request confidentiality - the person or body you
tell should make every effort to protect your identity.
If you report your concern to the media, in most cases you’ll lose your
whistleblowing law rights.
What your employer or a prescribed person will do
Your employer or the prescribed person will listen to your concern and
decide if any action is needed. You may be asked for further information.
You must say straight away if you do not want anyone else to know it was
you who raised the concern.
You will not have a say in how your concern is dealt with.
Your employer or the prescribed person can keep you informed about the
action they’ve taken, but they cannot give you much detail if they have to
keep the confidence of other people.

A prescribed person cannot help you with your relationship with your
employer.
If you’re not satisfied with how your employer dealt
with your concern
Tell someone else (for example a more senior member of staff) or a
prescribed person or body (/government/publications/blowing-the-whistle-list-ofprescribed-people-and-bodies--2) if you believe your concern was not taken
seriously or the wrongdoing is still going on.
Contact the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas)
3. If you’re treated unfairly after
whistleblowing
You can take a case to an employment tribunal (/employment-tribunals) if
you’ve been treated unfairly because you’ve blown the whistle.
You can get further information from the Advisory, Conciliation and
(http://www.adviceguide.org.uk/), the whistleblowing charity Protect
(https://protect-advice.org.uk/) or your trade union.
If you reported your concern anonymously, you may find it harder to argue
that your unfair treatment was as a result of your whistleblowing.
You must raise any claim of unfair dismissal within 3 months of your
employment ending.
You must notify Acas if you want to take your case to an employment
tribunal.