Redundancy: your rights
1. Overview
Redundancy is a form of dismissal from your job. It happens when
employers need to reduce their workforce.
If you’re being made redundant, you might be eligible for certain things,
including:
redundancy pay
a notice period
a consultation with your employer
the option to move into a different job
time off to find a new job
You also have specific rights if your employer is insolvent
(https://www.gov.uk/your-rights-if-your-employer-is-insolvent/your-rights).
You must be selected for redundancy (/redundancy-your-rights/being-selectedfor-redundancy) in a fair way, for example because of your level of experience
or capability to do the job.
You cannot be selected because of age, gender, or if you’re disabled or
pregnant. If you are, this could be classed as an unfair dismissal (/dismissal).
Get advice
You can get advice on redundancy from Acas (Advisory, Conciliation and
Citizens Advice (https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/about-us/how-we-provideadvice/advice/search-for-your-local-citizens-advice/#searchbox).
2. Being selected for redundancy
Your employer should use a fair and objective way of selecting you for
redundancy.
Commonly used methods are:

last in, first out (employees with the shortest length of service are
selected first)
asking for volunteers (self-selection)
disciplinary records
staff appraisal markings, skills, qualifications and experience
Your employer can make you redundant without having to follow a selection
process if your job no longer exists, for example if:
your employer is closing down a whole operation in a company and
making all the employees working in it redundant
you’re the only employee in your part of the organisation
Your employer may offer you a different role (/redundancy-your-rights/suitablealternative-employment) if one is available.
If your employer uses ‘last in, first out’, make sure it’s not discrimination,
for example if it means only young people are made redundant.
Reapplying for your own job
You might be asked to reapply for your own job, which could help your
employer decide who to select.
If you do not apply or you’re unsuccessful in your application, you’ll still
have a job until your employer makes you redundant.
Unfair selection
You cannot be selected for the following reasons - your redundancy would
be classed as an unfair dismissal (/dismissal):
sex
gender reassignment
marital status
sexual orientation
race
disability
religion or belief

age
your membership or non-membership of a trade union
health and safety activities
working pattern, for example part-time or fixed-term employees
maternity leave, birth or pregnancy
paternity leave, parental or dependants leave
you’re exercising your statutory rights
whistleblowing, for example making disclosures about your employer’s
wrongdoing
taking part in lawful industrial action lasting 12 weeks or less
taking action on health and safety grounds
doing jury service
you’re the trustee of a company pension scheme
Appealing the decision
You can appeal if you feel that you’ve been unfairly selected. Write to your
employer explaining the reasons.
You may be able to make a claim to an employment tribunal
(/employment-tribunals) for unfair dismissal.
Voluntary redundancy
It’s up to your employer whether they actually select you if you volunteer for
redundancy.
Your employer cannot just offer voluntary redundancy to age groups eligible
for an early retirement package - this could be unlawful age discrimination.
However, an early retirement package (for certain age groups) could be one
element of a voluntary redundancy offer open to all employees.
Apprentices
Talk to your manager and training provider if you’re an apprentice
(/apprenticeships-guide) and you’re worried about being made redundant.

Your training provider or the Apprenticeship service might be able to help
you find another employer to help you complete your apprenticeship.
3. Statutory redundancy pay
You’ll normally be entitled to statutory redundancy pay if you’re an employee
(/employment-status/employee) and you’ve been working for your current
employer for 2 years or more.
You’ll get:
half a week’s pay for each full year you were under 22
one week’s pay for each full year you were 22 or older, but under 41
one and half week’s pay for each full year you were 41 or older
Length of service is capped at 20 years.
Your weekly pay is the average you earned per week over the 12 weeks
before the day you got your redundancy notice.
If you were paid less than usual because you were ‘on furlough’
because of coronavirus, your statutory redundancy pay is based on
what you would have earned normally.
If you were made redundant on or after 6 April 2025, your weekly pay is
capped at £719 and the maximum statutory redundancy pay you can get is
£21,570. If you were made redundant before 6 April 2025, these amounts
will be lower.
Calculate your redundancy pay (/calculate-your-redundancy-pay).
You have 6 months from the date your job ends to apply for statutory
redundancy pay.
Exceptions
You’re not entitled to statutory redundancy pay if:
your employer offers to keep you on
your employer offers you suitable alternative work (/redundancy-yourrights/suitable-alternative-employment) which you refuse without good reason
Being dismissed for misconduct does not count as redundancy, so you
would not get statutory redundancy pay if this happened.

You’re not entitled to statutory redundancy pay if you fall into one or more of
the following categories:
former registered dock workers (covered by other arrangements) and
share fishermen
crown servants, members of the armed forces or police services
apprentices who are not employees at the end of their training
a domestic servant who is a member of the employer’s immediate family
Short-term and temporary lay-offs
You can claim statutory redundancy pay if you’re eligible and you’ve been
temporarily laid off (without pay or less than half a week’s pay) for either:
more than 4 weeks in a row
more than 6 non-consecutive weeks in a 13 week period
Write to your employer telling them you intend to claim statutory redundancy
pay. This must be done within 4 weeks of your last non-working day in the 4
or 6 week period.
If your employer does not reject your claim within 7 days of receiving it,
write to your employer again giving them your notice.
Your claim could be rejected if your normal work is likely to start within 4
weeks and continue for at least 13 weeks.
4. Tax and National Insurance
If you’re made redundant, you may get a ‘termination payment’. This could
include:
statutory redundancy pay
holiday pay
unpaid wages
company benefits, for example bonuses
Statutory redundancy pay under £30,000 is not taxable.
What you’ll pay tax and National Insurance on (/termination-payments-and-taxwhen-you-leave-a-job/what-you-pay-tax-and-national-insurance-on) depends on
what’s included in your termination payment.

5. Notice periods
You must be given a notice period before your employment ends.
The statutory redundancy notice periods are:
at least one week’s notice if employed between one month and 2 years
one week’s notice for each year if employed between 2 and 12 years
12 weeks’ notice if employed for 12 years or more
Check your contract. Your employer may give you more than the statutory
minimum, but they cannot give you less.
Notice pay
As well as statutory redundancy pay, your employer should either:
pay you through your notice period
pay you in lieu of notice depending on your circumstances
Your notice pay is based on the average you earned per week over the 12
weeks before your notice period starts.
If you were paid less than usual because you were ‘on furlough’
because of coronavirus, your notice pay is based on what you would
have earned normally.
Payment in lieu of notice
Your employment can be ended without notice if ‘payment in lieu of notice’
is included in your contract. Your employer will pay you instead of giving you
a notice period.
You get all of the basic pay you would’ve received during the notice period.
You may get extras such as pension contributions or private health care
insurance if they’re in your contract.
Your employer may still offer you payment in lieu of notice, even if your
contract does not mention it. If you accept, you should receive full pay
and any extras that are in your contract.

6. Consultation
You’re entitled to a consultation with your employer if you’re being made
redundant. This involves speaking to them about:
why you’re being made redundant
any alternatives to redundancy
If your employer is making up to 19 redundancies, there are no rules about
how they should carry out the consultation. If they’re making 20 or more
redundancies at the same time, the collective redundancy rules apply.
You can make a claim to an employment tribunal (/employment-tribunals) if
your employer does not consult properly, for example if they start late, or
do not consult at all.
Collective redundancy rules
If your employer is making 20 or more employees redundant (/employmentstatus/employee) at the same time, the consultation should take place
between your employer and a representative (rep).
This will either be:
a trade union rep (if you’re represented by a trade union)
an elected employee rep (if you’re not represented by a trade union, or if
your employer does not recognise your trade union)
Collective consultations must cover:
ways to avoid redundancies
the reasons for redundancies
how to keep the number of dismissals to a minimum
how to limit the effects for employees involved, for example by offering
retraining
Your employer must also meet certain legal requirements for collective
consultations (/staff-redundant/redundancy-consultations).
Length of consultation
There’s no time limit for how long the period of consultation should be, but
the minimum is:

20 to 99 redundancies - the consultation must start at least 30 days
before any dismissals take effect
100 or more redundancies - the consultation must start at least 45 days
before any dismissals take effect
Electing employee reps
If you’re an employee affected by the proposed redundancies you can:
stand for election as an employee rep
vote for other reps
Fixed-term contract employees
Your employer does not need to include you in collective consultation if
you’re employed under a fixed-term contract, except if they’re ending your
contract early because of redundancy.
7. Suitable alternative employment
Your employer might offer you ‘suitable alternative employment’ within your
organisation or an associated company.
They must offer you a suitable alternative job (if one is available) if you’re
on, or have recently taken, maternity leave or other types of parental leave
(/employee-rights-when-on-leave).
Whether a job is suitable depends on:
how similar the work is to your current job
the terms of the job being offered
your skills, abilities and circumstances in relation to the job
the pay (including benefits), status, hours and location
Your redundancy could be an unfair dismissal (/dismissal) if your
employer has suitable alternative employment and they do not offer it to
you.
Refusing an offer
You may lose your right to statutory redundancy pay if you unreasonably
turn down suitable alternative employment.

You can make a claim to an employment tribunal (/employment-tribunals) if
you think the job you’ve been offered is not suitable.
Trial periods
You have the right to a 4-week trial period for any alternative employment
you’re offered.
The 4-week period could be extended if you need training. Any extension
must be agreed in writing before the trial period starts.
Tell your employer during the trial period if you decide the new job is not
suitable. This will not affect your employment rights, including your right to
statutory redundancy pay.
You’ll lose your right to claim statutory redundancy pay if you do not give
notice within the 4-week trial period.
Time off for job hunting
If you’ve been continuously employed for 2 years by the date your notice
period (/redundancy-your-rights/notice-periods) ends, you’re allowed a
reasonable amount of time off to:
look for another job
arrange training to help you find another job
How long you can take will depend on your circumstances.
No matter how much time you take off to look for another job, the most your
employer has to pay you is 40% of one week’s pay.
Example
You work 5 days a week and you take 4 days off in total during the
whole notice period - your employer only has to pay you for the first 2
days.
8. Get help finding a new job
You can get help from the Jobcentre Plus Rapid Response Service to:

write CVs and find jobs
find information on benefits
find the right training and learn new skills
organise work trials (/jobcentre-plus-help-for-recruiters/work-trials) (if you’re
eligible)
get any extra help at work if you’re disabled, for example Access to Work
(/access-to-work)
You may also be able to get help with costs, such as:
travel to work expenses
childcare
tools or equipment
vocational training - you must be in your notice period to be considered
There’s a different service in Scotland
(https://www.myworldofwork.co.uk/my-career-options/redundancy-help-scotland)
and a different service in Wales (https://gov.wales/react-individuals).
Get in touch
You can contact the Rapid Response Service:
if you suspect you’re going to be made redundant
during your notice period
up to 13 weeks after you’ve been made redundant
Rapid Response Service
rrs.enquiries@dwp.gov.uk
Further information and support
You can read more about finding a job, how your pension might be affected,
and what benefits you could get (/guidance/redundancy-help-finding-work-andclaiming-benefits).