Holiday entitlement
1. Entitlement
Almost all people classed as workers  are legally
entitled to 5.6 weeks’ paid holiday a year (known as statutory leave
entitlement or annual leave).
This includes:
agency workers
workers with ‘irregular hours’ (where the number of hours they work in a
pay period often or always changes)
‘part-year’ workers (where there are periods of at least a week in a leave
year where they do not need to work and are not paid)
An employer can include bank holidays as part of statutory annual leave.
Statutory annual leave entitlement
Most workers who work a 5-day week must receive at least 28 days’ paid
annual leave a year. This is the equivalent of 5.6 weeks of holiday.
Working part-time
Part-time workers who work regular hours for the whole year are entitled to
at least 5.6 weeks’ paid holiday, but this will amount to fewer than 28 days.
For example, if they work 3 days a week, they must get at least 16.8 days’
leave a year (3 × 5.6).
Working irregular hours or for part of the year
People working irregular hours or part of the year are entitled to up to 5.6
weeks statutory leave.

They will build up (‘accrue’) leave depending on the hours they’ve already
worked, rather than getting a fixed number of days or hours.
For leave years beginning on or before 31 March 2024, leave
entitlement for irregular-hours and part-year workers does not need to
be accrued based on hours they’ve already worked. 

Limits on statutory leave
Statutory paid holiday entitlement is limited to 28 days. For example, staff
working 6 days a week are only entitled to 28 days’ paid holiday.
Bank holidays
Bank or public holidays do not have to be given as paid leave.
An employer can choose to include bank holidays as part of a worker’s
statutory annual leave.
Extra leave
An employer can choose to offer more leave than the legal minimum. They
do not have to apply all the rules that apply to statutory leave to the extra
leave. For example, a worker might need to be employed for a certain
amount of time before they become entitled to it.
Other aspects of holiday entitlement
Workers have the right to:
get holiday pay 
build up holiday entitlement during certain types of leave, such as
maternity, paternity, or adoption leave
build up holiday entitlement while off work sick
request holiday at the same time as sick leave 

Disputes
Paid annual leave is a legal right that an employer must provide. If a worker
thinks their rights to leave and pay are not being met there are a number of
ways to resolve the dispute .

2. Calculate leave entitlement
For regular-hours workers, employers can use a ‘leave year’ or an ‘accrual’
system to work out how much leave their staff should get.
For irregular-hours and part-year workers, employers must use a specific
accrual system.
For leave years beginning on or before 31 March 2024, employers can
use either a leave year or an accrual system to work out leave for
irregular-hours or part-year workers.
based on the average days or hours they work each week.
Leave year
An employer should tell their staff the dates of their statutory leave year as
soon as they start working, for example, it might run from 1 January to 31
December.
Workers must take their statutory leave during this time. If a leave year is
not set out in a contract then it will start:
on the first day of a new job (if started after 1 October 1998)
on 1 October (if started on or before 1 October 1998)
The leave year and holiday entitlement is not affected by maternity, paternity
or adoption leave. The employee still builds up (‘accrues’) holiday over
these periods.
Starting a job part way through a leave year
If a worker starts their job part way through a leave year, they’re only
entitled to part of their total annual leave for the current leave year. What
they get depends on how much of the year is left.
If a worker starts part way through the month, they can accrue one-twelfth
of their leave from their first day.

Example
Someone works a 5-day week and is entitled to 28 days’ annual leave a
year. The leave year starts on 1 January but they start their job on 13
January. They’re entitled to 2.5 days’ leave for January (28 days ÷ 12 =
2.33), rounding up to the nearest half day.
Alternatively, their employer can choose to calculate the first month’s leave
‘pro-rata’ (in proportion to the number of days worked) instead. This means
the worker does not accrue one-twelfth of their leave from their first day.
Accrual system
For regular hours workers, annual leave begins to build up (‘accrue’) as
soon as they start their job. An employer can use an accrual system to work
out a worker’s leave during the first year of the job. Under this system, a
worker gets one-twelfth of their leave in each month.
Example
Someone works a 5-day week and is entitled to 28 days’ annual leave a
year. After their third month in the job, they’d be entitled to 7 days’ leave
(a quarter of their total leave, or 28 ÷ 12 × 3).
Irregular-hours or part-year workers
Employers need to use a specific accrual system to calculate leave for
irregular-hours or part-year workers.
If their leave year began on or before 31 March 2024, employers do not
need to use this system until their leave year renews.
The amount of leave depends on:
how often they get paid (their ‘pay period’)
how many hours they worked in a pay period

Their entitlement will be 12.07% of the hours they worked in a pay period. It
must be rounded up to the nearest hour if the entitlement is 0.5 of an hour
or more.
For example, if they worked 30 hours and are paid weekly, they’ll have
earned 4 hours leave (30 × 12.07 ÷ 100 = 3.621). They can take this leave
from their next pay period.
Carrying over leave
The worker’s contract says how many days’ leave they can carry over into
the next year.
If a worker gets 28 days’ leave, they can carry over a maximum of 8 days.
If a worker gets more than 28 days’ leave, their employer may allow them to
carry over any additional untaken leave. Check the employment contract,
company handbook or intranet to see what the rules say.
Workers on parental or sick leave
If a worker cannot take some or all of their leave entitlement because
they’re on family-related leave, for example parental leave, they can carry
over their untaken leave into next year.
If a worker could not take their leave entitlement because they were sick,
they can carry over:
up to 20 of their 28 days’ leave entitlement if they work regular hours for
the whole year
up to 28 days of their leave entitlement if they work irregular hours or for
part of the year
If a worker was unable to take leave
Workers can carry over their whole leave entitlement if any of the following
apply:
they did not receive ‘rolled-up holiday pay’  that they were entitled to
they were not given reasonable opportunity to take leave
they were not told that they would lose their leave if they did not take it by
the end of the leave year

3. Holiday pay

Workers are entitled to a week’s pay for each week of statutory leave that
they take.
Most workers are entitled to 5.6 weeks’ paid holiday a year.
How to work out a week’s pay
A week’s pay is worked out according to the kind of hours someone works
and how they’re paid for the hours. This includes full-time, part-time, termtime and casual workers.
Working pattern How a week’s pay is calculated
Regular hours and A worker’s pay for a week
fixed pay (full- or parttime)
Shift work with regular The average number of weekly fixed hours a
hours (full- or part- worker has worked in the previous 52 weeks, at
time) their average hourly rate
Irregular-hours and A worker’s average pay from the previous 52
part-year work weeks (only counting weeks in which they were
paid)
Calculating average hourly or weekly rate
To calculate average hourly rate, only the hours worked and how much was
paid for them should be counted. Take the average rate over the last 52
weeks.
A ‘week’ usually runs from Sunday to Saturday. Only use another 7-day
period (like Thursday to Wednesday) if that’s how a worker’s pay is
calculated.
If no pay was paid in any week, count back another week so the rate is
based on 52 weeks in which pay was paid. You can count back a
maximum of 104 weeks to find these.

If a worker has less than 52 weeks of pay, use the average pay rate for the
full weeks they have worked.
Workers who are paid monthly
To work out a week’s pay for someone who’s paid monthly:
1 Calculate the worker’s average hourly pay for the last month. Do this
by dividing the month’s pay by the number of hours worked in the
month.
2 Calculate the weekly pay. Do this by multiplying the average hourly
pay by the number of hours worked in a week.
Use the weekly pay calculation for each of the last 52 weeks to work out an
average week’s pay.
‘Basic’ and ‘normal’ rate of pay
For regular-hours workers (full- or part-time), employers must pay:
at least 4 weeks of the worker’s statutory entitlement at their ‘normal’ rate
of pay
the remaining 1.6 weeks at a ‘basic’ rate of pay
For workers who work part of the year, employers must also follow these
rules if the worker’s leave year began on or before 31 March 2024.
For irregular-hours workers or those who work part of the year, all leave
must be paid at their ‘normal’ rate of pay.
‘Normal’ rate of pay includes commission, regular overtime payments, and
any payments related to length of service or professional qualifications. It
does not usually include bonus payments.
Rolled-up holiday pay
For regular-hours workers (full- or part- time), an employer cannot include
an amount for holiday pay in the hourly rate (known as ‘rolled-up holiday
pay’).
Employers can use rolled-up holiday pay for irregular-hours and part-year
workers, unless their leave year began on or before 31 March 2024.
More information

4. Booking time off
The general notice period for taking leave is at least twice as long as the
amount of leave a worker wants to take, plus 1 day. For example, a worker
would give 3 days’ notice for 1 day’s leave.
An employer can refuse a leave request or cancel leave but they must give
as much notice as the amount of leave requested, plus 1 day. For example,
an employer would give 11 days’ notice if the worker asked for 10 days’
leave.
If the contract says something different about the notice a worker or
employer should give, what’s in the contract will apply.
! Although employers can refuse to give leave at a certain time,
they cannot refuse to let workers take the leave at all.
Part leave days
Some workers may be entitled to a part leave day - for example if they’re
part-time or have a half day’s leave to take. How a part day should be taken
is up to the employer.
When leave can and cannot be taken
Employers can:

tell their staff to take leave, for example bank holidays or Christmas
restrict when leave can be taken, for example at certain busy periods
There may be rules about this in the employment contract.
The notice period for this is at least twice as long as the leave they want
their staff to take. The employer must tell the worker before the notice
period begins.
If an employer wants a worker to take leave, they need to make sure that
the worker can relax, rest and enjoy leisure during their holiday. For
example, an employer cannot force a sick worker to take leave.

5. Taking holiday before leaving a job
During their notice period the worker may be able to take whatever is left of
their statutory annual leave.
How much they get depends on how much of the leave year
has passed or how much leave they’ve accrued.
Taking more leave than the entitlement
If a worker has taken more leave than they’re entitled to, their employer
must not take money from their final pay unless it’s been agreed beforehand
in writing. The rules in this situation should be outlined in the employment
contract, company handbook or intranet.
Getting paid instead of taking holidays
The only time someone can get paid in place of taking statutory leave
(known as ‘payment in lieu’) is when they leave their job. Employers must
pay for untaken statutory leave, even if the worker is dismissed for gross
misconduct.
If an employer offers more than 5.6 weeks’ annual leave, they can agree
separate arrangements for the extra leave.