Dismissal: your rights

1. Overview
Dismissal is when your employer ends your employment - they do not
always have to give you notice.
If you’re dismissed, your employer must show they’ve:
a valid reason that they can justify
acted reasonably in the circumstances
They must also:
be consistent - for example, not dismiss you for doing something that they
let other employees do
have investigated the situation fully before dismissing you - for example, if
a complaint was made about you
If you’re a part-time or fixed-term worker, you cannot be treated less
favourably than a full-time or permanent employee.
Notice period
You must be given at least the notice stated in your contract or the statutory
minimum notice period, whichever is longer.
There are some situations where you can be dismissed immediately
 - for example, for violence.
Getting your dismissal in writing
You have the right to ask for a written statement from your employer giving
the reasons why you’ve been dismissed if you’re an employee and have
completed 2 years’ service (1 year if you started before 6 April 2012).
Your employer must supply the statement within 14 days of you asking for it.
Your employer must give you a written statement if you’re dismissed while
you are on Statutory Maternity Leave . You get this:
even if you’ve not asked for one
regardless of how long you’ve worked for your employer

2. Reasons you can be dismissed
There are some situations when your employer can dismiss you fairly.
Not being able to do your job properly
You may not be able to do your job properly if, for example, you:
have not been able to keep up with important changes to your job - for
example, a new computer system
cannot get along with your colleagues
Before taking any action, your employer should:
follow disciplinary procedures - for example, warn you that your work is
not satisfactory
give you a chance to improve - for example, by training you
Illness
You can be dismissed if you have a persistent or long-term illness that
makes it impossible for you to do your job.
Before taking any action, your employer should:
look for ways to support you - for example, considering whether the job
itself is making you sick and needs changing
give you reasonable time to recover from your illness
If you have a disability (which may include long-term illness), your employer
has a legal duty to support disability in the workplace .
Dismissal because of a disability may be unlawful discrimination.
Redundancy

Redundancy is a form of dismissal and is fair in most cases.
If the reason you are selected for redundancy  is unfair
then you will have been unfairly dismissed.
Summary dismissal
You can be dismissed for ‘gross misconduct’ without your employer going
through the normal disciplinary procedures. This can happen if, for example,
you’re violent towards a colleague, customer or property.
Your employer should always investigate the circumstances before making
a dismissal, even in possible gross misconduct cases.
A ‘statutory restriction’
You can be dismissed if continuing to employ you would break the law - for
example, if you’re a driver in a lorry firm and you lose your driving licence.
It’s impossible to carry on employing you
If it’s impossible to carry on employing you, it’s likely to be fair. For example,
if a factory burns down and it’s no longer possible to employ anyone.
A ‘substantial reason’
You may be dismissed fairly if, for example:
you unreasonably refuse to accept a company reorganisation that
changes your employment terms
you’re sent to prison

3. Unfair and constructive dismissal
In certain situations, you may be able to take legal action if you’re
dismissed.
Unfair dismissal
Your dismissal could be unfair if your employer does not:
have a good reason for dismissing you
follow the company’s formal disciplinary or dismissal process (or the
statutory minimum dismissal procedure in Northern Ireland)

Situations when your dismissal is likely to be unfair include if you:
asked for flexible working
refused to give up your working time rights - for example, to take rest
breaks
resigned and gave the correct notice period 
joined a trade union 
took part in legal industrial action that lasted 12 weeks or less
needed time off for jury service
applied for maternity, paternity and adoption leave
were on any maternity, paternity and adoption leave you’re entitled to
exposed wrongdoing in the workplace (whistleblowing)
were forced to retire (known as ‘compulsory retirement’)
Compulsory retirement is not allowed unless your employer can
objectively justify it, but you can challenge it at an employment tribunal.
Constructive dismissal
Constructive dismissal is when you’re forced to leave your job against your
will because of your employer’s conduct.
The reasons you leave your job must be serious, for example, they:
do not pay you or suddenly demote you for no reason
force you to accept unreasonable changes to how you work - for
example, tell you to work night shifts when your contract is only for day
work
let other employees harass or bully you
Your employer’s breach of contract may be one serious incident or a series
of incidents that are serious when taken together.
You should try and sort any issues out by speaking to your employer to
solve the dispute.

If you do have a case for constructive dismissal, you should leave your
job immediately - your employer may argue that, by staying, you
accepted the conduct or treatment.
