Part of
Get ready to employ someone for the first time: step by
step
(/get-ready-to-employ-someone)
The National Minimum Wage
and Living Wage
1. Overview
The minimum wage a worker should get (/national-minimum-wage-rates)
depends on their age and if they’re an apprentice.
The National Minimum Wage is the minimum pay per hour almost all
workers are entitled to. The National Living Wage is higher than the National
Minimum Wage - workers get it if they’re 21 and over.
It does not matter how small an employer is, they still have to pay the
correct minimum wage.
Calculate the minimum wage
Use the minimum wage calculators to check if the correct minimum wage
has been paid.
There are separate calculators for workers and employers.
Use the calculator for workers (/am-i-getting-minimum-wage) to check if you’re
getting the correct minimum wage or if an employer owes you payment from
the previous year.
Use the calculator for employers (/minimum-wage-calculator-employers) to
check if you’re paying the correct minimum wage or if you owe a payment
from the previous year.
There is also guidance on working out the minimum wage for different types
of work (/minimum-wage-different-types-work).

Minimum Wage or National Living Wage.
2. Who gets the minimum wage
People classed as ‘workers’ (/employment-status/worker) must be at least
school leaving age (/know-when-you-can-leave-school) to get the National
Minimum Wage. They must be 21 or over to get the National Living Wage.
Contracts for payments below the minimum wage are not legally binding.
The worker is still entitled to the National Minimum Wage or National Living
Wage.
Workers are also entitled to the correct minimum wage if they’re:
part-time
casual labourers, for example someone hired for one day
agency workers
workers and homeworkers paid by the number of items they make
apprentices
trainees, workers on probation
disabled workers
agricultural workers
foreign workers
seafarers
offshore workers
non-family members living in the employer’s home who share in the work
and leisure activities and are treated as one of the family, for example au
pairs
Apprentices
Apprentices are entitled to the apprentice rate (/national-minimum-wage-rates)
if they’re either:
under 19
19 or over and in the first year of their apprenticeship
Apprentices over 19 who have completed the first year of their
apprenticeship are entitled to the correct minimum wage for their age.

Not entitled to the minimum wage
The following types of workers are not entitled to the National Minimum
Wage or National Living Wage:
self-employed people (/employment-status/selfemployed-contractor) running
their own business
company directors (/employment-status/director)
people who are volunteers (/volunteering/pay-and-expenses) or voluntary
workers
workers on a government employment programme, such as the Work
Programme
members of the armed forces
family members of the employer living in the employer’s home
workers younger than school leaving age (usually 16)
higher and further education students on work experience or a work
placement up to one year
people shadowing others at work
workers on government pre-apprenticeships schemes
people on the following European Union (EU) programmes: Leonardo da
Vinci, Erasmus+, Comenius
people working on a Jobcentre Plus Work trial for up to 6 weeks
share fishermen
prisoners
people living and working in a religious community
Employers who offer internships (sometimes called ‘work placements’ or
‘work experience’) (/employment-rights-for-interns) should check if the
person is entitled to the minimum wage.
Voluntary work
You’re classed as doing voluntary work if you can only get certain limited
benefits (for example reasonable travel or lunch expenses) and you’re
working for a:
charity
voluntary organisation or associated fundraising body

statutory body
be getting the minimum wage.
3. Employers and the minimum wage
Employers must pay workers the correct minimum wage.
You can read guidance on the minimum wage rates (/national-minimum-wagerates) and who they apply to (/national-minimum-wage/who-gets-the-minimumwage).
What’s not included in minimum wage calculations
Some payments must not be included when the minimum wage is
calculated.
These are:
payments for the employer’s own use or benefit, for example if the
employer has paid for travel to work
things the worker bought for the job and is not refunded for, such as tools,
uniform, safety equipment
tips, service charges and cover charges
extra pay for working unsocial hours on a shift
Find out what counts as working time (/minimum-wage-different-typeswork).
What’s included in minimum wage calculations
Some payments must be included when the minimum wage is calculated.
These are:
Income Tax and National Insurance contributions
wage advances or loans
repayment of wage advances or loans
repayment of overpaid wages

things the worker paid for that are not needed for the job or paid for
voluntarily, such as meals
accommodation provided by an employer (/national-minimum-wageaccommodation) above the offset rate (£10.66 a day or £74.62 a week)
penalty charges for a worker’s misconduct
Example
John is 27 and works 40 hours a week. He earns £12.50 per hour or
£500 a week.
He pays £15 a week to rent his uniform and the money’s not refunded.
To calculate his minimum wage, John’s employer must deduct the
uniform rental from the pay.
This means John makes £485 per week (£500 minus £15) which is
£12.13 per hour. This is below the minimum wage rate of £12.21.
John’s employer will need to pay the arrears back to John.
Read the detailed guidance on calculating the minimum wage
(/government/publications/calculating-the-minimum-wage) for more on what
counts and does not count towards the minimum wage, eligibility, how to
calculate the minimum wage and how it is enforced.
Employer checks
! It’s a criminal offence for employers to not pay someone the
National Minimum Wage or National Living Wage, or to fake
payment records.
Employers who discover they’ve paid a worker below the correct minimum
wage must pay any arrears immediately. Use the National Minimum Wage
and National Living Wage calculator for employers (/minimum-wage-calculatoremployers) to check a worker has been paid correctly.
HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) officers have the right to carry out
checks at any time and ask to see payment records. They can also
investigate employers if a worker complains to them.
If HMRC finds that an employer has not been paying the correct rates, any
arrears have to be paid back immediately. There will also be a fine and
offenders might be named by the government.

Keeping records
It’s the employer’s responsibility to keep records proving that they are
paying the minimum wage. These records must be kept for at least 6 years
if they:
were created on or after 1 April 2021
still had to be kept on 31 March 2021 under the previous rule that records
must be kept for 3 years
The period records must be kept for starts from the last day of the pay
reference period after the one they cover.
They do not have to be kept in any particular form, for example they can be
paper or computer records. But employers must be able to produce records
for an individual pay reference period in a single document.
Most employers use their payroll records as proof of:
total pay - including pay deductions, allowances and tips
total hours worked - including absences and overtime
Employers may also need to keep records such as:
agreements about working hours, pay and conditions, such as contracts
documents that show why a worker is not entitled to the minimum wage
Pay reference periods
Pay reference periods are usually set by how often someone is paid, for
example one week, one month or 10 days. A pay reference period cannot
be longer than 31 days.
A worker must be paid the minimum wage, on average, for the time worked
in the pay reference period.
4. Worker disputes over minimum wage
Workers who think their pay is below the correct minimum wage rate should
talk to their employer first.
If this does not solve the problem, they can ask the employer in writing to
see their payment records. The worker can take someone with them and
make copies of the records.
If an employer owes the worker any arrears they have to pay these back.

them solve a payment dispute.
Workers can also make a complaint to HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC)
(/government/publications/pay-and-work-rights-complaints) about their employer
or employment agency or complain on behalf of someone else.
If the employer refuses payment
If HMRC find that the employer has not paid they will send them a notice for
the arrears plus a fine for not paying the minimum wage.
HMRC can take them to court on behalf of the worker if the employer still
refuses to pay.
Employment tribunal
Workers can also go directly to the employment tribunal (/employmenttribunals/taking-a-case-to-an-employment-tribunal) themselves.
Workers who have been dismissed because of a minimum wage dispute
can also complain to the employment tribunal for unfair dismissal
(/dismissal/unfair-and-constructive-dismissal).