Handling an employee's grievance
1. Overview
If your employee has a concern or problem that they have not been able to
resolve informally, they may make a formal grievance complaint to you.
Businesses must have a written grievance procedure  in place and share it with all employees. It
must say how the process works and how long it takes.
After a hearing of the evidence , you should let the employee know your decision in writing. The
employee can appeal the decision  if they are not happy with it.

2. Grievance procedure
By law, employers must set out a grievance procedure and share it in
writing with all employees, for example, in their statement of employment or
staff handbook. It must include:
who the employee should contact about a grievance
how to contact this person
It should also:
say that if the problem cannot be resolved informally, there will be a
meeting with the employee, called a grievance hearing
set out time limits for each stage of the process
identify who to contact if the normal contact person is involved in the
grievance
explain how to appeal a grievance decision
state that employees can be accompanied in any meetings by a
colleague or union representative
outline what happens if a grievance is raised during disciplinary action
You do not have to include information about the grievance procedure in
employment contracts. However, if you do, you must follow the procedure,
or the employee could bring a breach of contract claim against you.
Acas Code of Practice
The Acas Code of Practice is not legally binding. However, an employment
tribunal can reduce or increase any money awarded in a case by up to 25%
if the code has not been followed.

3. The grievance hearing
Preparing for the hearing
Before holding a hearing, employers should:
give the employee notice so that they can prepare their case
carry out a full investigation if necessary and take statements from any
witnesses who cannot attend
make it clear that the employee can bring a colleague or union
representative if they want to
arrange for another manager to attend to make sure that the hearing is
conducted properly
arrange for someone to take notes
Delays
If the employee cannot attend the hearing (for example, because they’re ill),
offer them a reasonable alternative date and time.
The employee can also suggest a different time for the hearing if the person
accompanying them cannot attend. They must do this within 5 working days
after you proposed the original meeting time.
You can make your decision without having a hearing if:
you have already rearranged the meeting, but the employee fails to
attend
the employee is on long-term sick leave and unable to go to meetings in
the near future (they can supply written information instead if they want
to)

4. Employers' decisions and appeals
After the hearing
You should give the employee a copy of the meeting records. You may be
able to leave out some information in certain circumstances (for example, to
protect a witness).
After you have decided the action to take, write to the parties involved,
setting out:
your decision and the reasons behind it
the appeals process and deadline
If there are any delays during the appeal process, it’s important
that you tell the employee as soon as possible.
Appeals
If the employee appeals, there should be another hearing to re-examine the
decision. The process is the same as the original hearing but you should
also look at:
the reasoning behind the appeal
any new evidence
If possible, the appeal should not be heard by the same person who held
the original hearing.
After the appeal hearing, you should set out your decision in writing and
state that this is the final outcome.
