Disciplinary procedures and
action against you at work
1. Overview
Your employer could start formal disciplinary action against you if they have
concerns about your work, conduct or absence.
Before taking formal disciplinary action or dismissing you, your employer
may try to raise the matter informally with you. However, they can go
straight to their formal disciplinary or dismissal procedures.
Disciplinary procedures are a set way for an employer to deal with
disciplinary issues. They should include a disciplinary hearing where you’re
given a chance to explain your side of the story.
There should also be a chance to appeal any disciplinary action your
employer decides to take.
2. How disciplinary procedures work
Your employer should put their disciplinary procedure in writing, and make it
easily available to all staff.
It should say what performance and behaviour might lead to disciplinary
action and what action your employer might take.
It should also include the name of someone you can speak to if you do not
agree with your employer’s disciplinary decision.
Disciplinary steps
Your employer’s disciplinary procedure should include the following steps:
1 A letter setting out the issue.
2 A meeting to discuss the issue.

3 A disciplinary decision.
4 A chance to appeal this decision.
Acas (Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service)
Your employer’s disciplinary procedures should follow the Acas Code of
Practice on disciplinary and grievance procedures
Your employer does not have to follow the Acas code. However, if they
do not and you win an employment tribunal (/employment-tribunals)
against them, you could get a larger payout.
There’s more guidance about how employers should run disciplinaries in the
Acas guide on discipline and grievances at work
Disciplinary procedures and employment contracts
Your employer can also put their disciplinary procedures in your
employment contract (/employment-contracts-and-conditions).
If your employer does this and then does not follow these procedures
you could sue them for breach of contract.
Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland has different ways of solving workplace disputes
(https://www.nidirect.gov.uk/information-and-services/employment/resolvingworkplace-disputes).
3. Disciplinary hearings
Your employer should not take any disciplinary action before meeting with
you first and discussing the problem.
This disciplinary meeting (normally called a ‘hearing’) should be at a
reasonable time and place.

At the hearing your employer should:
explain the complaint against you
go through the evidence
give you a chance to tell your side of the story
If you raise a significant new fact or issue at the hearing your employer
might stop it and look into the issue. They should then rearrange the
hearing at a later date.
Taking someone with you to a disciplinary hearing
You have the right to take someone with you to a disciplinary hearing,
but you must tell your employer about this first.
Your companion can be either:
a colleague
a trade union representative
a trade union official
If a colleague cannot go with you and you’re not in the union you can ask to
bring a family member or a Citizens Advice worker. However, your employer
does not have to agree to this unless your employment contract says they
must.
The companion can:
present and/or sum up your case and say things to support your case
speak to you during the hearing
Your companion cannot answer questions on your behalf.
Your companion cannot be disciplined for supporting you.
Disciplinary action
After the hearing your employer should write to you as soon as possible,
saying what action they’re going to take, and telling you about your right to
appeal.

The decision might be:
no action
written warning
final warning
demotion
dismissal (/dismissal)
It might also be anything else that could resolve the problem, for example
an agreement to mediate with a co-worker you’ve had personal problems
with.
4. Disciplinary appeals
If you think disciplinary action taken against you is unfair you can appeal.
Write to your employer saying you’re appealing and why.
Appeal hearings
You should be offered another meeting to discuss your appeal. This appeal
hearing should be held as soon as possible.
If possible it should be dealt with by someone who has not already been
involved with your disciplinary action.
An appeal hearing will be similar to your original disciplinary meeting and
you’ll have the right to bring a companion.
Final decision
After the appeal meeting your employer should write to you with their final
decision.
5. Suspension from work
When a disciplinary issue is being looked into you might be suspended from
work. This does not happen very often. If it does it should normally be with
pay and you should be told why you’re being suspended.
Employment contracts
You can be suspended without pay if your employment contract
(/employment-contracts-and-conditions) says your employer can do this, but

they must be acting reasonably.
If your employment contract does not say your employer can do this, your
employer may still be able to suspend you, but with pay. To show that it’s
not a punishment the suspension will normally be on full pay.
Employment rights when suspended
You keep your employment rights while suspended. If you do not get the
right pay you may be able to make a claim to an employment tribunal for
‘unlawful deduction from wages’.
Talking to other employees, customers and/or
suppliers
If you’re suspended, you might be told not to talk to other employees,
customers and/or suppliers. If this means you cannot defend yourself
properly at a disciplinary hearing, you could make an appeal.
But if you’ve been asked not to talk and you do, your employer might decide
to take further disciplinary action against you.
6. Help and advice with disciplinary
issues
There are several organisations that could give you advice about
disciplinary issues.
Acas (the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service) offers free,
confidential and impartial advice about all employment rights issues.
Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm
Find out about call charges (/call-charges)
Citizens Advice
Your local Citizens Advice (https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/) can also give
free and impartial advice.

Trade unions
If you’re a member of a trade union you can get help and advice from them.
Equality Advisory Support Service
Contact the Equality Advisory Support Service for advice about
discrimination, equality and human rights.
FREEPOST
Equality Advisory Support Service
FPN4431
EASS helpline
Online contact form (http://www.equalityadvisoryservice.com/app/ask)
Telephone: 0808 800 0082
Textphone: 0808 800 0084
Monday to Friday, 9am to 8pm
Saturday, 10am to 2pm
Find out about call charges (/call-charges)
You can also find more information on the Equality Advisory Support Service
(http://www.equalityadvisoryservice.com) website.