Sex discrimination
1 . The law on sex discrimination
Sex is one of 9 'protected characteristics' covered by discrimination law (Equality Act 2010).
Sex discrimination includes direct and indirect discrimination, harassment and victimisation.
Sex discrimination can happen in any area of work. It can result from decisions made at work or from sexist behaviour.
It could be a regular pattern of behaviour or a one-off incident. It can happen in the workplace, at work social events or when people
are working remotely.
How the law defines sex
Important: In April 2025, the Supreme Court ruled that sex in the Equality Act 2010 refers to 'biological sex'. This will usually
mean the sex recorded on someone's original birth certificate.
The law (Equality Act 2010) defines sex using the terms man and woman.
Someone's legal sex is the sex recorded on their birth certificate or a Gender Recognition Certificate (GRC).
Who is protected by sex discrimination law
Sex discrimination can happen to both men and women.
At work, the law protects the following people against discrimination:
employees and workers
contractors and self-employed people hired to personally do the work
job applicants
former employees – usually around providing references
Understanding more about discrimination

2. Types of sex discrimination
Sex discrimination includes:
direct discrimination
indirect discrimination
harassment
victimisation
It's important to understand the different types of sex discrimination. This is so you know what your rights and responsibilities are under
discrimination law (Equality Act 2010).
Equal pay is also covered by the law. Men and women must get equal pay for doing 'equal work'.
Direct discrimination
Direct sex discrimination is when someone is put at a disadvantage or treated less favourably because:
they're a man or a woman
they are wrongly believed to be a man or a woman – this is called 'discrimination by perception'
In some circumstances, direct discrimination can happen because of a connection with someone of the other sex. This is called
'discrimination by association'.
Example of direct discrimination
Rowan is the only woman in the sales team. Rowan's manager thinks men are better at sales than women. Rowan is given less
important contracts to work on and is not able to earn as much commission. This is direct discrimination because of sex.
Example of discrimination by perception
Charlie applies for a job and does not get an interview. The recruiting manager thinks Charlie has the right skills and experience. But
they assume Charlie is a man and they would prefer to hire a woman. As Charlie is a woman, this could be sex discrimination by
perception.
Example of discrimination by association
Amal starts a new job and is asked to attend a trade fair abroad. Amal's partner is due to give birth on the day of the trade fair, so Amal
says no. The employer dismisses Amal for 'lack of commitment'. This could be sex discrimination by association. Amal is a man but the
discrimination is because of their connection with a woman.

Indirect discrimination
Indirect sex discrimination is when a working practice, policy or rule applies to everyone but puts a person or group at a disadvantage
because of their sex.
Example of indirect discrimination
Dayo is a woman and works part time. They do not get a promotion because the organisation has a policy that supervisors must work
full time. Dayo cannot do more hours because of childcare. As women are more likely to have childcare responsibilities, this is likely to
be indirect sex discrimination.
The organisation might be able to defend their decision. They would need to show that their business need is important enough to
justify the possible discrimination.
When a decision might not be discrimination
In certain circumstances, an employer might be able to make or justify a decision based on sex. For example:
positive action – to address a situation where men or women are at a disadvantage or underrepresented
occupational requirement – when being a man or a woman is essential for a job
objective justification – for example when there's a genuine business need
Harassment
There are 3 types of harassment that can happen because of sex. These are:
harassment related to sex
sexual harassment
less favourable treatment as a result of harassment
Harassment related to sex
Harassment related to sex is when someone experiences unwanted behaviour that's related to them being a man or a woman.
To be harassment, the unwanted behaviour must have either:
violated someone's dignity
created an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment
Example of harassment directed at a specific person

Nikola manages a team of men. Some of them do not like being managed by a woman. They make negative comments about women
and undermine Nikola's authority. This creates an intimidating and hostile environment for Nikola.
Example of harassment not directed at a specific person
A manager regularly comments that men should not take time off to look after their children because women ought to do it. Some
people in the team are offended by these comments. This could be harassment, even though the comments were not directed at a
specific person.
Sexual harassment
Sexual harassment is unwanted behaviour of a sexual nature.
Less favourable treatment as a result of harassment
This type of harassment is when someone is treated less favourably because of how they responded to previous:
harassment related to sex
sexual harassment
Victimisation
Victimisation is when someone is treated less favourably as a result of being involved with a discrimination complaint.
It does not matter if the complaint was made by them or someone else.
The law also protects someone from victimisation if someone else thinks they're involved with a complaint.
Ways someone can be victimised include being labelled a troublemaker, being left out, or not being allowed to do something.
Example of victimisation
Indy is supporting a friend at work who's making a sex discrimination complaint. A manager threatens Indy with dismissal if they
continue to support the claim. This is victimisation.
Related content
Types of pregnancy and maternity discrimination

3. Making and handling complaints
If someone has experienced or witnessed sex discrimination at work, they can make a complaint to their employer. The employer
should take it seriously and look into it as soon as possible.
Sex discrimination can be very distressing. It can have a severe impact on someone's mental health and wellbeing.
Employers should make sure that:
reporting sex discrimination is as easy as possible
anyone who's experienced or witnessed it feels safe, protected and supported
anyone accused of sex discrimination is treated in an impartial and fair way
If you've experienced sex discrimination
It's best to make a complaint as soon as possible. But if you make a complaint a long time after an incident took place, your employer
should still take it seriously.
Witnessing sex discrimination
If you think someone at work is being discriminated against, there are actions you can take. This could include stepping in to try and
stop it happening if you feel it's safe, supporting people or giving evidence.
Witnessing discrimination might also affect you personally. In some circumstances, you could make a harassment complaint yourself.
Handling a discrimination complaint
If you're an employer or manager, you should look into any discrimination complaint in a way that's fair and sensitive to:
the person who made the complaint
anyone who witnessed it
anyone accused of discrimination

4. Preventing sex discrimination
All employers should take steps to try to make sure sex discrimination does not happen at work.
As an employer, you should:
aim for a culture where everyone accepts that sex discrimination is not acceptable
recognise and promote the benefits of a diverse and inclusive organisation

Steps for preventing sex discrimination
Many ways to prevent discrimination apply equally to all 'protected characteristics'.
Measures that are specific to preventing sex discrimination include:
stopping inappropriate behaviour
being aware of common stereotypes
considering issues that can particularly affect women
creating ways for employees to be heard
providing equal pay
gender pay gap reporting
If you're a small organisation with limited resources, there's still a lot you can do to prevent discrimination. Making your organisation
more inclusive does not have to be costly or complicated.
Stopping inappropriate behaviour
Managers have a responsibility to tackle any inappropriate language or behaviour in their teams.
You should make it clear that sexist language and behaviour is not acceptable. This includes:
inappropriate, offensive or negative terms about women or men
things some might consider as 'banter' or jokes
Avoid words and phrases that reinforce negative stereotypes about women or men.
Being aware of unconscious bias and stereotypes
Avoid making decisions based on assumptions. This can include:
unconscious bias – when someone's thoughts or decisions are influenced by beliefs or assumptions they might not be aware of
sexist stereotypes – having a fixed view of what someone's like or what they can do because they're a man or a woman
Examples of unconscious bias could include:
a manager not realising they've ignored an idea from a woman then accepted the same idea from a man
automatically asking a man to do any lifting that's needed, without considering if a woman could do it equally well
Examples of stereotyping could include:
being surprised when a man asks to work part time so they can look after their children
thinking that women are less suited to leadership roles than men
Considering issues that can particularly affect women
Sex discrimination can happen to both men and women. However, some work decisions are likely to affect more women than men.
For example, women are generally more likely to have childcare or other caring responsibilities. If you do not offer flexible working or
different working patterns, that's more likely to affect women.

Check your policies
You should check all relevant policies to make sure they do not discriminate. For example:
absence
dress code
flexible working
part-time working
performance and reward
recruitment
Having up-to-date and inclusive policies can help to:
prevent discrimination
improve your reputation as an employer
For example, you could consider including a statement about flexible working in job adverts. This would let applicants know you're
open to different ways of working.
Consider new policies
You could develop new policies to help remove any disadvantage that women might experience. For example policies around:
menopause
pregnancy and maternity, including breastfeeding
Creating ways for employees to be heard
This can include setting up ways for people to share experiences, raise concerns and support each other.
For example:
setting up a support network, for example a women's network or carers' network
holding activities and events for everyone, for example around the menopause or men's health
having a menopause and wellbeing champion
If you do these things, make sure you:
give people the time to be involved
actively listen to concerns raised
take steps to resolve issues
Providing equal pay
Make sure you know your responsibilities around equal pay.
By law, men and women must get equal pay for doing 'equal work'. The law also applies to contractual terms and conditions.
Gender pay gap reporting
The 'gender pay gap' is the difference in average earnings between women and men. Employers with more than 250 employees must
report their organisation's gender pay gap.
