Zero-hours contracts

Summary
A zero-hours contract is a type of employment contract where workers have
no guaranteed hours and agree to be potentially available for work. They are
favoured by companies seeking labour flexibility and by workers seeking
flexibility around their other commitments.
Opinion on zero-hours contracts has been mixed. Employee organisations
tend to argue that the contracts result in financial insecurity for workers who
lack key employment rights; employer organisations stress their usefulness
when seeking to meet fluctuating demand for labour and argue that they play
a vital role in keeping people in employment.
What are the legal issues with zero-hours
contracts?
Working under a zero-hours contract does not in itself determine what
employment rights someone does or does not enjoy. Rather, that depends on
their employment status, for which a range of legal tests exists. See the
Library briefing Employment status for more details.
However, zero-hours contracts can make it challenging to establish
someone’s employment status and their qualification for certain employment
rights. ‘Mutuality of obligation’ – where one person is obliged to offer work
and the other is obliged to accept it – is a key legal test for whether someone
is an ‘employee’. With some zero-hours contracts it can be hard to establish
whether such mutuality of obligation exists or not.
Similarly, it is difficult for some zero-hours contract employees to build up
enough uninterrupted continuity of service to qualify for certain employment
rights, such as unfair dismissal. This is because a week’s gap without work
can be enough to reset the timer on their continuity of service.
Since 2015, employers have been banned by section 27A of the Employment
Rights Act 1996 from inserting ‘exclusivity clauses’ into zero-hours contracts,
which try to stop employees with such contracts from also working elsewhere.
How many people have zero-hours contracts?
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) collects statistics on zero-hours
contracts as part of the Labour Force Survey.
According to ONS, over a million people in the UK were employed on a zerohours contract in April to June 2024. Reported use of zero-hours significantly
increased contracts between 2012 and 2016, though it is likely this was due to
increased awareness of such contracts among survey respondents at the
time, rather than an increase in their use. Since then, the rate of zero-hours
contracts has increased by a smaller amount, from around 2.5% to 3.5%.
Based on a small survey by the Chartered Institute of Personnel and
Development (CIPD), businesses report that they are most likely to use zerohours contracts to manage fluctuations in demand for labour.
Collectively, the research by the ONS and the CIPD suggests that people on
zero-hours contracts are more likely to be:
• aged 16 to 24
• female
• working part time
• from London and the South East
• employed in the accommodation and food sector
• on average, paid slightly less than those not on zero-hours contracts
• reporting lower opportunities for career progression
What reforms have been proposed?
The perceived increase in zero-hours contracts in recent years has prompted
expressions of concern inside and outside Parliament, although many
stakeholders support their use. A series of private members’ bills aiming to
ban or regulate zero-hours contracts have been introduced, though only one
– the Workers (Predictable Terms and Conditions) Bill 2023 – received Royal
Assent. No commencement regulations have been made to bring this act into
force.
Instead, following the 2024 general election, the newly elected Labour
government pledged to ban “exploitative zero-hours contracts”, as part of a
promised Employment Rights Bill. The Employment Rights Bill 2024-25 was
published on 10 October 2024. The key rights created would be:
• The right to reasonable notice of shifts and payment for shifts that are
cancelled or curtailed at short notice.
• The right to a guaranteed hours contract reflecting the hours regularly
worked.

1 Zero-hours contracts statistics
1.1 What is a zero-hours contract?
The term ‘zero-hours contract’ can be used to refer to a range of casual
working relationships. According to the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service (Acas) the term ‘zero-hours contract’ is usually understood to mean:
• your employer does not have to give you any minimum working hours
• you do not have to take any work offered1
By contrast, an article in People Management in 2017 draws a distinction
between ‘causal contracts’ where there is no obligation to either offer or
accept any work, and ‘zero-hours contracts’ where “The employer has no
obligation to offer the employee any employment assignments, but the
employee has an obligation to accept the employment assignments offered –
they could face disciplinary action if they repeatedly reject work or turn it
down without valid reasons.”2
The only significant definition in legislation of a zero-hours contract is found
in section 27A of the Employment Rights Act 1996, which defines a zero-hours
contract as one under which:
(a) the undertaking to do or perform work or services is an undertaking to do
so conditionally on the employer making work or services available to the
worker, and
(b) there is no certainty that any such work or services will be made available
to the worker.3
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) collects statistics on zero-hours
contracts as part of its Labour Force Survey. This measure uses a selfidentified definition of a ‘zero-hours contract’, so will depend on how workers
themselves understand the term.

1.2 Prevalence of zero-hours contracts
People working on zero-hours contracts
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) Labour Force Survey asks workers
about their employment arrangements in their main job. The statistics rely on
survey respondents correctly identifying their contractual arrangements: the
survey will only identify those workers on zero-hours contracts who are aware
that they are on such a contract. This also relies on them being aware of the
concept of a zero-hours contract.
Estimates for April to June 2024 suggest that 1.03 million people were on
zero-hours contracts in their main job. This is 3.1% of all people in
employment in the UK.
The total number of zero-hours contracts that are in use will be higher than
the number of people working on zero-hours contracts in their main job: some
people may hold multiple contracts.
As shown in the chart below, there has been a significant increase in the
number of people reporting they are on zero-hours contracts since 2012.
Between October to December 2012 and October to December 2016, the
number of people on zero-hours contracts more than tripled. By the same
quarter in 2023, the number of people increased by a further 50%. Some of
this is explained by increased awareness of zero-hours contracts from 2012
onwards.
The very sharp rise in employment on zero-hours contracts between 2012 and
2016 very likely reflected better awareness of zero-hours contracts as a result
of extensive media coverage in 2013. This meant that more survey
respondents correctly identified themselves as employed on zero-hours
contracts, rather than a genuine increase in their use. The ONS has said that
the increase from 2012 to 2016 is probably affected by more people being
aware that they are employed on zero-hours contracts.4
Indeed, around half of the reported change in zero-hours contracts between
2012 and 2013 came from people who said they had been in their job for over a
year, which suggests that some respondents must have failed to report or
identify that they were on a zero-hours contract in previous surveys.5
A small proportion of employers use zero-hours contracts for the majority of
their workforce, according to Chartered Institute of Personnel and
Development (CIPD) surveys. This was based on responses from 132
employers.6

1.3 Hours worked on zero-hour contracts
People reporting that they are employed on a zero-hours contract work fewer
hours per week on average than other workers. However, most workers on
zero-hours contracts also report that they do not want to work more hours.
Estimates from the Labour Force Survey show that in April to June 2024:
• 75% of people reporting that they were on a zero-hours contract were
working part-time. This compares with 24% of workers not on zero-hours
contracts who were working part-time.
• In their main job, workers on zero-hours contracts usually worked an
average of 21.8 hours per week, compared with 36.5 hours for all people
in employment.7
• Around 17% of people on zero-hours contracts worked no hours on that
contract in the survey reference week. This compared with around 9% of
workers not on zero-hours contracts.
• Around 16% of people on a zero-hours contract reported that they
wanted more hours in their current job. A further 10% wanted an
additional job or a replacement job with longer hours. This compares
with 5% of people not on a zero-hours contract who would like more
hours in their current job, and 1% who would like an additional job or a
replacement job with longer hours.
• 60% of people on a zero-hours contract reported that they did not want
more hours, compared with nearly 80% of those in employment not on a
zero-hours contract.

1.4 Job satisfaction
People on zero-hours contracts are likely to report lower satisfaction on a
range of measures of job quality, according to responses to the ONS Annual
Population Survey.8
In 2023, people working on zero-hours contracts were less likely to report that
they were satisfied with the hours they were working, that their contract was
their “desired contract”, that they had opportunities for career progression,
and that they had good employee involvement.

1.5 Characteristics of people employed on zerohours contracts
As shown in the chart below, a higher proportion of workers on zero-hours
contracts work part time, are in full-time education and are women than is
the case for the workforce as a whole.
Based on Labour Force Survey estimates for April to June 2024:9
• Around 75% of people on zero-hours contracts worked part time,
compared with around 23% of other workers.
• 19% of people on a zero-hours contract were in full-time education,
compared with 2% of other workers. Nevertheless, a higher number of
full-time students were employed on a contract with guaranteed hours
than on a zero-hours contract.
• 54% of people employed on zero-hours contracts were women. Around
555,000 women were working on zero-hours contracts, almost 4% of all
women in employment. This compares with 477,000 men, almost 3% of
all men in employment.
Characteristics of people on zero-hours contracts

People in employment who are young are more likely to be on zero-hours
contracts than people in employment who are older. Nearly 12% of those in
employment aged between 16 and 24 are on zero-hours contracts. 5% of
those aged over 65 in employment are on zero-hours contracts.
A higher proportion of people on zero-hours contracts live in London and the
South East, with 30% of zero-hours workers living there. People on zero-hours
contracts are least likely to live in Wales, the North East, or Northern Ireland.
This is shown in the table below.
People on zero-hours contracts by region
UK, April to June 2024 (rate, not seasonally adjusted)
Level Rate
London 170 16%
South East 144 14%
West Midlands 105 10%
South West 97 9%
North West 95 9%
East 88 9%
Yorks and Humber 85 8%
Scotland 78 8%
East Midlands 69 7%
Wales 46 4%
North East 39 4%
Northern Ireland 17 2%
UK 1,033 100%
Notes
The rate is people on zero-hour contracts in the region, out of all
those on zero-hour contracts

1.6 Prevalence by industry
The Labour Force Survey asks respondents to describe the area in which they
work, but people may not know or correctly say which sector their employer is
based in. For example, someone working for a food delivery company may say
they work in the food sector, when in fact their employer may fall under the
transport sector. Therefore, these results should be interpreted with caution,
and they are likely to underreport the number of workers in the admin and
support services sector in particular.
Workers on zero-hours contracts reported that they were most likely to be
employed in the accommodation and food sector, with around 32% of all
workers on zero-hours contracts working in this sector. They were least likely
to be working in public administration. These trends are shown in the table
below.
People on zero-hours contracts by industry
UK, April to June 2024 (rate, not seasonally adjusted)
Level Rate
(thousands) (percentage)
Accommodation and food 332 32.2
Transport, arts, other services 167 16.1
Health and social work 151 14.7
Education 91 8.8
Admin and support services 64 6.2
Wholesale and retail 64 6.2
Production, including agriculture 44 4.2
Information, finance, professional 43 4.2
Construction 41 4.0
Public admin 24 2.4
Total 1,033 100.0
Notes
The data for construction and public administration was based on small sample sizes, so the results
should be used with caution
The total includes people with workplace outside UK and those who did not state their industry;
therefore sum of component percentages may not equal 100.

1.7 Pay
Workers on zero-hours contracts tend to be paid less than other employees,
even after accounting for differences in workers’ characteristics.
The Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD) found that
people on zero-hours contracts were earning around 6% less on average in
October to December 2021. This is even after other factors are taken into
account, such as the types of people on zero-hours contracts and the types of
jobs they were doing.10
This reflects earlier findings by the Resolution Foundation, an economics think
tank.11 It analysed Labour Force Survey data for 2011 to 2016 and estimated
that workers on zero-hours contracts earned on average 6.6% less per hour
(93p per hour).
The findings do come with some caveats. The Labour Force Survey is known to
underestimate levels of pay compared with other sources. As noted above,
estimates also rely on people being aware that they are employed on zerohours contracts.

1.8 Trends in business use of zero-hours contracts
The CIPD published a report in 2022 on zero-hours contracts, which analysed
Labour Force Survey data as well as their own survey data. The report noted
that:
• Businesses’ most frequently reported reason for using zero-hours
contracts was to manage fluctuations in demand for labour, with 64% of
businesses surveyed citing this. Based on a survey of 167 responses, other
reasons cited were to provide flexibility for the individual (46%) and to
provide coverage for staff absences (35%). 12
• Over 50% of businesses in the CIPD survey reported that they give
between one week and one month’s notice of work schedules for their
workers.13
• 33% of businesses surveyed said they give workers compensation for
shifts cancelled with fewer than 24 hours’ notice. 48% of businesses said
they did not give compensation.14

2 Zero-hours contracts and employment law
2.1 Zero-hours contracts and employment status
The use of zero-hours contracts raises a number of legal issues. One of the
most important considerations is the employment status of people on zerohours contracts: whether they are “employees”, “workers” or self-employed.
For a more detailed discussion of this legal issue, see the Library briefing
Employment status. In summary:
• Employees have the full range of employment rights, including
protections against unfair dismissal, redundancy pay and various kinds
of parental leave.
• Workers have fewer rights than employees, although retain many of the
most basic entitlements such as the National Minimum Wage, paid
annual leave and protections against discrimination and for
whistleblowing.
• Self-employed independent contractors are not eligible for most
employment rights. However, they will still enjoy some equality law
protections against discrimination and some basic protections of their
health and safety while on a client’s premises.
The tests for employee status
The case law indicates that if the day-to-day reality of any work undertaken
suggests a relationship of employment, then the contract will be one of
employment, and the person working under it will be classed as an employee.
A number of factors determine whether or not a contract is one of
employment. The crucial elements of a contract of employment are that:
• it must impose an obligation on a person to provide work personally
• there must be mutuality of obligation between employer and employee
(the employer must offer work and the employee must accept it)
• the worker must expressly or implicitly agree to be subject to the control
of the person for whom they work to a ‘sufficient’ degree
• the other provisions of the contract must be consistent with it being a
contract of service15
The case law on the use of zero-hours contracts has focused on the second
issue: mutuality of obligation. Under contracts of employment, the employee
is normally obliged to work, and the employer is obliged to provide work and
pay for it. Under a zero-hours contract, it is possible for no work to be offered
or accepted at all, so such obligations are not readily apparent.
However, mutuality of obligation may still in certain cases be inferred with
zero-hours contracts. The circumstances in which it will be inferred were
considered by the Employment Appeal Tribunal (EAT) in Pulse Healthcare v
Carewatch Care Services Ltd & Ors [2012].16 The focus in that case was the
reality of the agreement between the company and the worker, rather than
exclusively the written terms of the contract (see section below).
The reality of the agreement
Employment tribunals will look closely at the reality of the agreement, not
merely the wording of the contract.
In the Pulse Healthcare case, the EAT was required to decide whether the
claimants were employees, within the meaning of section 230 of the
Employment Rights Act 1996, despite being employed under a contract
entitled “Zero-hours Contract Agreement”. The EAT concluded that the
claimants were employees, and that there was a mutuality of obligation,
despite the written terms of the contract suggesting otherwise.
The decision of the EAT indicates that where a worker is employed on a zerohours contract and provided with regular work which is regularly accepted,
there exists a possibility that the contract will be one of employment.
The EAT considered the employment status of zero-hours workers again in a
2014 case, Saha v Viewpoint Field Services. In Saha, the EAT concluded that
the claimant (a telephone interviewer) was not an employee because of a
lack of mutuality. Relevant to that decision was the fact that the claimant
lacked a set working pattern and was free to decline shifts.18 When looked at
together, Pulse Healthcare and Saha show that the factual working pattern of
a zero-hours worker will play a significant part in determining their
employment status.
Continuity of service
Assuming that a zero-hours worker can establish employee status, they may
yet face further difficulty in claiming certain employment rights. Many
employment rights take effect only after a period of qualifying service. For
example, the right not to be unfairly dismissed is only available to employees
with two years’ qualifying service.
As noted by the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas) in their
guidance on Zero-hours contracts, “If you're not provided work for a full
calendar week (7 consecutive days from Sunday to the following Saturday),
this usually counts as a break in employment.”19 This may therefore make it
hard for zero-hours contracts workers, even if classed as employees, to build
up the continuity of service required to qualify for many employment rights
such as unfair dismissal protections.

2.2 Exclusivity clauses
Exclusivity clauses are clauses in employment contracts which aim to either
stop employees from working for another employer altogether or which
require the employee to seek consent before accepting work with another
employer.
Under section 27A of the Employment Rights Act 1996, exclusivity clauses are
“unenforceable against the worker” for any employees on a zero-hours
contract.
Since 5 December 2022, these protections against exclusivity clauses have
also applied to all employees and workers whose weekly income is below the
Lower Earnings Limit (£123 per week in 2022 to 2025), even if not on zero-hours
contracts.20
Employees on zero-hours contracts have a right not to suffer detriment or
dismissal for breaching any purported exclusivity clause and can bring a
claim to an employment tribunal for redress.21

3 Zero-hours contracts and Universal Credit
Universal Credit is paid and assessed on a monthly cycle, with payments
increasing or decreasing depending on earnings and other income during
each assessment period. Income from employment or self-employment
reduces the maximum Universal Credit award available at a constant 55%
rate for each pound of net (post-tax) earnings. This is known as the taper
rate. Some households are also able to keep some of their earned income (the
‘work allowance’) before it begins to affect their award.22
Unlike income-based Jobseeker’s Allowance (JSA) and Working Tax Credit
(WTC) – the unemployment and in-work benefits that Universal Credit is
replacing – there are no hours rules in Universal Credit. JSA is payable to
people not in full-time work, which is defined as work of 16 hours a week or
more.23 In addition, even if someone is working under 16 hours in a particular
week, any earnings above a small, disregarded amount will reduce the
amount payable on a pound for pound basis. People who are in work may be
eligible for WTC but only if they work a minimum number of hours a week.24
The previous system of JSA and WTC was criticised for removing the financial
incentive for people who worked for fewer than 16 hours a week to increase
their working hours. It was also criticised for requiring people to move
between out-of-work and in-work systems if their hours changed. The
coalition government argued that this failed “to reflect the flexible working
pattern that modern employers and individuals need”.25
As Universal Credit was introduced, ministers said that the new system’s
responsiveness made the new benefit more suitable for workers on zero hours
contracts and other flexible contracts where hours and earnings may vary on
a month-to-month basis.26

3.1 Conditionality and requirements to accept
employment with zero-hours contracts
Under both Jobseeker’s Allowance and Universal Credit, claimants are
expected to seek work and accept offers of employment. They can be
sanctioned for refusing to take up offers or leaving employment without good
reason.
In contrast with the rules for Jobseeker’s Allowance, Universal Credit
claimants may receive a sanction if they refuse to apply or accept a zerohours contract job or leave a zero-hours job voluntarily. 27 However, sanctions
are not supposed to be applied where employers reduce hours because
claimants take up work elsewhere, or where hours would restrict a claimant’s
ability to increase their earnings with other employers.28
In reply to a letter from Sheila Gilmore MP in March 2014, Esther McVey, then
Minister for Employment, explained why sanctions might be imposed on a
Universal Credit claimant for failing to accept zero-hours work, but not on
someone claiming Jobseeker’s Allowance. In doing so, she cited the greater
flexibility and responsiveness in the Universal Credit system:
Within Jobseekers [sic] Allowance […] our coaches do not currently require
claimants to apply for jobs with zero hours contracts. The structure of
Jobseeker’s Allowance (JSA) and supporting processes could make the
interaction of zero hour contracts and the benefit system difficult to manage –
short periods of work could end a JSA claim, requiring new claims to be made
in periods where earnings fall.
Universal Credit, of course, is payable when people are in work as well as out
of work so the need to reclaim when earnings fluctuate is removed. In addition
Universal Credit is designed to be response to variations in earnings so each
monthly payment will reflect the amount actually earned, even if this includes
some weeks when no work was done. So in Universal Credit our coaches can
mandate zero hours contracts.29

4 Policy background and discussion
4.1 Coalition government policy
2013 consultation: Zero-hours employment contracts
On 16 September 2013, then Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and
Skills, Vince Cable, announced that he would launch a consultation on zerohours contracts. He said that that there were “abuses in the system”,
especially around the employer use of exclusivity clauses.30 Exclusivity clauses
require workers to work exclusively for one employer, regardless of the hours
offered.
The consultation ran between December 2013 to March 2014. The consultation
document identified exclusivity clauses as being particularly concerning and
sought views on whether it was appropriate to ban these in contracts that
provided no guarantee of work.31
Consultation outcome: Banning exclusivity clauses
In June 2014, the government published the outcome of the consultation, and
announced their intention to ban the use of exclusivity clauses.32
The government also announced plans to:
• consult further on how to prevent rogue employers evading the
exclusivity ban, for example through offering 1 hour fixed contracts
• work with business representatives and unions to develop a code of
practice on the fair use of zero hours contracts by the end of the year
(2014)
• work with stakeholders to review existing guidance and improve
information available to employees and employers on using these
contracts
Plans to ban exclusivity contracts were taken forward in the Small Business,
Enterprise and Employment Bill (see below).34
Small Business, Enterprise and Employment Act 2015
The Small Business, Enterprise and Employment Act 2015 came into force on
26 March 2015.35
Section 153 of the act came into force on 26 May 2015 and renders exclusivity
clauses in zero-hours contracts unenforceable.36 The section amended the
Employment Rights Act 1996 by inserting a new part 2A.37
Section 27A of the 1996 act defines “zero hours contract” as
a contract of employment or other worker’s contract under which—
(a) the undertaking to do or perform work or services is an undertaking to do
so conditionally on the employer making work or services available to the
worker, and
(b) there is no certainty that any such work or services will be made available
to the worker.38
Section 27B of the 1996 act as amended contains the ban on exclusivity
clauses:
(3) Any provision of a zero hours contract which—
(a) prohibits the worker from doing work or performing services under another
contract or under any other arrangement, or
(b) prohibits the worker from doing so without the employer’s consent, is
unenforceable against the worker.39
By amending the 1996 act, the Small Business, Enterprise and Employment
Act 2015 created a power to enable ministers to make regulations that would
penalise employers who use exclusivity clauses.42 The Exclusivity Terms in
Zero Hours Contracts (Redress) Regulations 2015 came into force on 14
December 2015.43
The regulations created rights for:
• zero-hours workers classed as “employees” not to be unfairly dismissed
for failing to comply with an exclusivity requirement
• zero-hours workers classed as “workers” not to be subjected to any
detriment for failing to comply with an exclusivity requirement
The rights are enforceable against an employer by way of a claim to an
employment tribunal.44
These were followed in 2022 by the Exclusivity Terms for Zero Hours Workers
(Unenforceability and Redress) Regulations 2022. The 2022 regulations
extended the protections against exclusivity clauses to other workers earning
less than the Lower Earnings Limit (currently £123 per week), even if not on
zero-hours contracts.45

4.2 Conservative government policy, 2015-2024
Taylor Review, 2016-17
On 1 October 2016, the Prime Minister commissioned Matthew Taylor, Chief
Executive of the Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufactures
and Commerce (RSA), to assess the implications for employment regulation of
new forms of work driven by digital platforms.
The Independent Review of Employment Practices in the Modern Economy
launched on 30 November 2016.46 The subsequent report, Good Work: the
Taylor Review of modern working practices, was published on 11 July 2017.
Recommendations
The review suggested that the benefits of flexibility could be shared more
equally if the government ensured that workers were entitled to a higher
minimum rate of pay for hours that are not guaranteed. It recommended that
the government consult the Low Pay Commission (LPC) on the impact of
bringing in a higher National Minimum Wage for hours that are not
guaranteed in a contract.48
The review also recommended that zero-hours workers be given the right to
request regular hours, using the average weekly hours worked over the
previous 12 months as a starting assumption for any new contract.49
Government response
The government accepted the recommendation regarding the National
Minimum Wage and asked the LPC to provide an assessment of the impact of
these options to ministers in their October 2018 report.50
The government also consulted on the right to request more regular hours.51
In the Good Work Plan, the government committed to bringing forward
legislation to introduce a right for all workers to request a more predictable
and stable contract.52
