Flexible working
The statutory right to request flexible working entitles qualifying employees to
apply to their employers for a change to their terms and conditions of
employment relating to their hours, times or location of work. The change
could include, for example, working part-time, from home or compressed
hours. Employers may only refuse the request on grounds defined in
legislation, for example, the burden of additional costs or a detrimental effect
on the ability to meet customer demand.
The right to request flexible working was introduced by section 47 of the
Employment Act 2002 for employees with parental or caring responsibilities.
Since then, successive governments have extended the right to wider
categories of employees. On 30 June 2014 the right was extended to all
employees with 26 weeks’ continuous employment by the Children and
Families Act 2014.
In April 2024, new legislation expanded rights for employees around flexible
working, paid and unpaid leave, and protection from redundancy during
parental leave.
These changes mean employees can now make two, rather than one,
requests per year for flexible working arrangements. The deadline for
employers to respond to such requests has also been reduced from three to
two months. The changes also mean employers have to provide reasons for
denying any request, and employees no longer have to explain the impact of
their request.
This briefing provides an overview of the right to request flexible working. It
explains the legal framework, charts the development of the right since its
introduction and discusses government policy.
What is flexible working?
Flexible working is seen as a means of enabling employees to balance their
personal and working lives, benefiting employers in terms of workforce
recruitment, motivation and retention.
Examples of flexible working arrangements include part-time working,
compressed hours, and flexitime.

2 The legal framework
2.1 The right
The right to request flexible working is set out in Part 8A and section 47E of
the Employment Rights Act 1996, as amended, and associated regulations.
From the first day of their employment, an employee may apply to their
employer requesting a change in hours, times or location of work as between
their home and employer’s place of business. The application must:
• be in writing;
• state that it is a flexible working application;
• specify the change applied for and the date on which it is proposed the
change should become effective;
• state whether the employee has previously made an application to the
employer and if so when;
• be dated.
Under section 1 of the Employment Relations (Flexible Working) Act 2023,
employees are allowed to make two flexible working requests in a 12-month
period.
• Part time: Working less than full-time hours (usually by working fewer
days).
• Compressed hours: Working full-time hours but over fewer days - for
example a 9-day fortnight (an employee has a day off every other
week and works longer hours on the other days)
• Flexitime: The employee chooses when to start and end work (within
agreed limits) but works certain ‘core hours’, for example 10am to
4pm every day.
• Annualised hours: The employee has to work a certain number of
hours over the year but has some flexibility regarding when they work.
• Staggered hours: The employee has different start, finish and break
times from other workers.
• Phased retirement: Older workers can choose when they want to retire
and can reduce their hours and work part time.
Acas Code of Practice
The right to request flexible working is supported by a statutory Code of
Practice produced by the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service
(Acas).The code sets out how employees can make statutory requests for
flexible working.

2.2 Employer’s duties in relation to an application
The employer must respond to a request “in a reasonable manner” and within
two months or such longer period as agreed by the employer and employee.
What is “reasonable” depends on the particular circumstances and is not
defined in the legislation.
The Acas Code of Practice suggests that a ‘reasonable manner’ should
include carefully assessing the effect of the requested change for both the
employer and employee, including the potential benefits or impacts of
accepting or rejecting the request.
Should the employer refuse to grant the request it has discretion as to
whether to allow an appeal; if it does, the same time limits apply. The
employer may only refuse the application because they consider that one or
more of the following grounds applies:
• the burden of additional costs;
• detrimental effect on ability to meet customer demand;
• inability to re-organise work among existing staff;
• inability to recruit additional staff;
• detrimental impact on quality;
• detrimental impact on performance;
• insufficiency of work during the periods the employee proposes to work;
or
• planned structural changes
• such other grounds as the Secretary of State may specify by
regulations.
The employer may treat the employee’s application as withdrawn if the
employee, without good reason, fails to attend both the first meeting
arranged by the employer to discuss the application and the next meeting
arranged for that purpose.

2.3 Remedies
If the employer fails to comply with these obligations, makes their decision
based on incorrect facts or treats the employee’s application as withdrawn in
circumstances that do not satisfy the statutory conditions, the employee may
present a complaint to an employment tribunal.
The tribunal may make an order for reconsideration of the application and
award compensation of such amount it considers just and equitable, not
exceeding eight weeks’ pay. A weeks’ pay is subject to the statutory maximum
set annually by regulations. The most recently prescribed limits are:
Maximum limits of one week's pay for compensation awards
Date Maximum (£)
6 April 2024 – 5 April 2025 700
6 April 2023 – 5 April 2024 643
6 April 2022 – 5 April 2023 571

3 Policy background and discussion
3.1 Labour Government policy: 1997-2010
The right to request flexible working was introduced by section 47 of the
Employment Act 2002, following a report by the Work and Parents
Taskforce. Section 27 came into effect on 6 April 2003 at the same time as
the associated regulations. The legislation initially gave the right to parents
of children under six or disabled children under 18.
Consultation to extend the right to flexible working,

3.2 Coalition Government policy, 2010-15
In the 2010 General Election manifesto, the Conservative Party pledged to
extend the right to request flexible working to all parents with children under
the age of 18, and to consider extending the right to all employees.40 The
Liberal Democrats’ 2010 manifesto pledged to extend the right to all
employees.41 The Coalition Agreement contained a commitment to “extend
the right to request flexible working to all employees, consulting with
business on how best to do so.”42
Regulations to extend the right to parents with
children under the age of 18, 2010
In September 2010 the Coalition Government announced plans – as an interim
step, prior to an extension to all employees - to extend the right to request
flexible working to all parents of children under the age of 18.43 This was due
to be implemented by the Flexible Working (Eligibility, Complaints and
Remedies) (Amendment) Regulations 2010.44 However, the government
repealed the Regulations before they came into force, citing their belief that
the regulations could become ‘an unhelpful complication’ at a time when
‘employers need to focus on growth and creating jobs.’45
In the accompanying press release, the government recommitted to
extending the right to request flexible working to all employees in due course
and explained that “the aim behind delaying the extension of flexible working
is to allow businesses breathing space in the current economic climate.”46
Children and Families Act 2014
The government’s commitment to extend the right to all employees was taken
forward by the Children and Families Act 2014.
On 30 June 2014, Part 9 of the Children and Families Act 2014 amended the
law on flexible working requests to extend the right to all employees with 26
weeks’ continuous employment.47 It also removed previous procedural
requirements for employers’ responses, replacing these with a duty to deal
with the application in a reasonable manner.

3.3 Policy and discussion under the Conservative
Government, 2015-2024
Women and Equalities Committee Gender Pay Gap
Inquiry
On 22 March 2016 the Women and Equalities Select Committee published a
report following its inquiry into the gender pay gap.56 Chapter 4 of the report
considered the case for flexible working, noting:
There is clear evidence flexible working benefits the UK economy and individual
employers. However, a culture of presenteeism and a lack of creative thinking
about job design are hampering progress towards flexibility as the norm. Too
few employers are considering the benefits of offering jobs as open to flexible
working.57
In light of their findings, the committee recommended:
• All jobs should be available to work flexibly unless an employer can
demonstrate an immediate and continuing business case against doing
so.
• The right to request flexible working should be amended to allow those
working less than full-time hours to request the opportunity to work
more.
• The Department for Business Industry and Skills should facilitate a
campaign outlining the benefits of flexible working and flexible hiring,
sharing best practice within sectors.58
Government response
The government responded on 21 February 2017 to the Committee’s report.59
Regarding the recommendation that all jobs should be available to work
flexibly, the government stated that they were committed to promoting the
business benefits of flexible working but recognised that individual employers
were best placed to decide whether this arrangement suited their
organisation:
The statutory Right to Request Flexible Working, which was extended to all
employees with 26 weeks’ continuous service in June 2014, enables employees
to agree a working pattern which suits them and their employer and better
balance work with other commitments.
The Government is committed to working with business and other groups to
promote the business benefits of flexible working. We want to see as many jobs
as possible offered in this way and while we recognise the need to increase
communications activity around flexible working, we believe that individual
employers are best placed to decide what types of working arrangements their
business can accommodate
On the issue of amending the right to request flexible working to allow
employees to request to work more hours if they are not already working fulltime, the response pointed out that the existing law already allowed for this.61

Employment Bill 2019
In the December 2019 Queen’s Speech, the government committed to
introducing an Employment Bill.75 The proposed bill included a commitment to
make flexible working the default, subject to consultation, unless there were
good business reasons preventing it.76
This Employment Bill was not introduced during the 2019-2024 Parliament.
Consultation: Making flexible working the default, 2021
The government issued a consultation on flexible working in September 2021,
including a proposal to make the right to request flexible working a day one
right.77 The consultation closed on 1 December 2021.
Prior to the government publishing the consultation response, the
Employment Relations (Flexible Working) Bill was introduced to Parliament by
Yasmin Qureshi MP.78
On 5 December 2022, following the second reading of the bill, the government
published their response to the consultation. In their response, they pledged
to make flexible working a day one right, along with four other commitments
that matched the measures contained in the bill:
• require employers to consult with their employees, as a means of
exploring the available options, before rejecting their flexible request;
• allow employees to make two flexible working requests in any 12-month
period and requiring employers to respond to requests within two
months
• require a decision period of 2 months in respect of a statutory flexible
working request (rather than the current three)
• remove the requirement for employees to set out how the effects of their
flexible working request might be dealt with by the employer.79

Employment Relations (Flexible Working) Bill, 2022
The purpose of the Employment Relations (Flexible Working) Bill was to
amend the Employment Rights Act 1996 to change the current right to request
flexible working in the following ways:
• removing the requirement for employees to explain in their applications
what effect they think it will have on the employer,
• allowing employees to make two flexible working requests per 12 months
instead of the one currently allowed,
• requiring employers to consult with the employee before being allowed
to refuse an application, and
• reducing the deadline for an employer decision on flexible working
requests from three months to two months.
The Bill applied to England, Scotland and Wales but not Northern Ireland
where employment law is a devolved matter.80
The Bill gained cross-party support, including from the government, and
received Royal Assent on 20 July 2023.81
The Flexible Working (Amendment) Regulations 2023
The Flexible Working Regulations enable employees to make such requests
from their first day of employment, by removing the 26-week qualifying
period.82
The changes to employment law from the above Act and accompanying
regulations came into force on 6 April 2024.
