Key Employment Rights

Deduction from wages
Section 13(1) of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provides that an employer
cannot lawfully make deductions from wages unless entitled to by the
contract of employment, statute or because the worker has previously
consented in writing to the deduction.
This restriction does not apply to certain deductions, including for taxes,
reimbursing the employer for expenses or overpayments, or because of a
worker’s participation in industrial action or a statutory disciplinary
proceeding.
The definition of wages used is broad, including holiday pay, statutory
sickness or leave pay, bonuses and commission, but excluding expenses,
pensions and redundancy pay.
If an employer makes an unauthorised deduction from wages the employee
may complain to an employment tribunal. The claim must be brought within
three months of the failure to pay the wages. Where a series of deductions
occurs, the time limit runs from the last deduction in the series.
Working time
Subject to various qualifications discussed below, the Working Time
Regulations 1998 limit average working time to 48 hours per week and eight
hours per night for night workers and entitle workers to:
• a daily rest period of eleven hours in each 24-hour period;
• a weekly rest period of 24 hours in each seven-day period;
• a 20-minute rest break once daily working time exceeds six hours; and
• 5.6 weeks’ annual leave
These implemented EU law on working time consolidated in Directive
2003/88/EC (the ‘Working Time Directive’). The Regulations set limits on
weekly working time and night work, and provide rights to rest periods and
breaks. Since the UK’s departure from the European Union and the passage of
the Retained EU Law (Revocation and Reform) Act 2023, these Regulations
form part of assimilated law.
“Working time” is defined under the Regulations as including any period
during which the worker is working, at the employer’s disposal and carrying
out their activity or duties, or undertaking certain types of work-related
training. Employment contracts or collective/workforce agreements may
specify additional types of working time for the purposes of the Regulations.

These Regulations do not apply to certain seafarers, transport workers or
emergency services.
The 48 hour weekly working limit does not apply where an employer has
obtained a worker’s agreement in writing to “opt-out” of it. This may relate to
a specific period or apply indefinitely. Unless the agreement provides
otherwise, it is terminable by the worker if they give at least seven days’
written notice (any otherwise agreed notice period cannot exceed three
months). Workers cannot be subjected to detriment or dismissal for refusing
to enter into or continue such an opt-out – any such dismissal is
automatically unfair.
The Government has published guidance on calculating working time,
including information on which hours count as working time.
Other issues
In addition to these three issues, this briefing also includes discussion of other
key employment law issues such as:
• Agency Workers
• Bullying
• Disciplinary and grievance
• Equality and discrimination
• Family-related leave
• Flexible working
• Holiday
• Industrial action
• National Minimum Wage
• Redundancy
• Statement of initial employment particulars
• Statutory Sick Pay
• Transfer of undertakings & protection of employment
• Variation of contract
• Whistleblowing

1 Introduction
Some of the rights are available only to “employees”, and some to
“workers”. The difference between these two categories of individual is
complex and beyond the scope of this briefing (it is discussed in the Library
briefing on Employment status).1 Where relevant, the summary boxes in the
sections of this paper highlight whether a right is available to employees or
workers.
Some rights have qualifying periods. For example, the right not to be unfairly
dismissed is available only to employees who have at least two years
qualifying service, with some exceptions for cases of automatically unfair
reasons for dismissal.
In most cases the primary means of enforcing an employment right is by the
workers themselves bringing a claim before an employment tribunal. There is
a strict three-month time limit for doing this which is waived only in
exceptional circumstances. Only for a small number of rights, such as
payment of the National Minimum Wage, is there any state-led enforcement.
1.1 Northern Ireland
This paper covers employment law as it applies across Great Britain
(England, Scotland and Wales). Employment law in Northern Ireland is a
devolved matter; while in practice most employment rights in Northern
Ireland are similar to those in Great Britain, devolution has led to divergence
in some areas.
This paper should therefore not be taken as an accurate guide to the law as it
applies in Northern Ireland – for questions about employment rights in
Northern Ireland please refer to guidance on Key differences in employment
law between NI and GB from the Labour Relations Agency of Northern Ireland.
Alternatively MPs and their staff can contact the House of Commons Library
with a bespoke request.
1.2 Further information
Key Employment Rights
• the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service is the principal
statutory body charged with providing guidance on employment law; it
operates a free helpline for both employers and employees; and
• the Equality Advisory and Support Service (EASS) can advise workers on
the application of the Equality Act 2010 – see their About us page for an
overview of the assistance EASS provides, and their contact details to get
in touch.

2 Agency Workers
Summary
After 12 weeks agency workers become entitled to the same basic terms of
employment as permanent workers.
2.1 Rights after 12 weeks
Once an agency worker has been on assignment in the same role for the same
hirer for a period of 12 continuous calendar weeks they become entitled to the
same basic terms of employment as if they had been directly recruited by the
hirer. The right is provided by the Agency Workers Regulations 2010, which
implemented EU Directive 2008/104/EC. These Regulations are now part of
assimilated law.
The basic working and employment conditions for these purposes are the
“relevant terms and conditions” 2 that the hirer would normally include in a
contract for a comparable employee (defined as an employee under the
supervision and direction of the hirer; engaged in the same or broadly similar
work; and, if possible, who works or is based at the same establishment as
the agency worker).
Regulations 5 and 6 provide that “relevant terms and conditions” means
those relating to:
• pay;
• the duration of working time;
• night work;
• rest periods;
• rest breaks; and
• annual leave.3

The right to the same pay does not include rights to all the same payments or
rewards. For example, the following are excluded: occupational sick pay;
pension or retirement benefits; maternity, paternity or adoption leave; and
redundancy pay.4
Additionally, and not subject to the 12-week qualifying period, agency workers
are entitled to access the same collective facilities and amenities (e.g.
canteen) as comparable workers, and have the right to be informed by the
hirer of any relevant vacant posts.5 The hirer must also give agency workers
the same opportunities as comparable workers to find permanent
employment with the hirer.6

2.2 Remedies
An agency worker may complain to an employment tribunal if an
agency/hirer has infringed their rights under the Regulations. If the agency
worker suspects infringement has occurred, they may request from the
hirer/agency written information relating to their treatment, which must be
provided within 28 days (regulation 16). Regulation 17 provides unfair
dismissal rights for workers classed as “employees” who are dismissed for
asserting rights under the Regulations.7

3 Blacklisting
Summary
A “blacklist” is a list containing details of persons who have engaged in union
activities or membership, compiled to facilitate employment-related
discrimination.
If an employer refuses to employ a person or subjects a worker to detriment
for a reason related to a blacklist, the person/worker may complain to an
employment tribunal.
If the tribunal finds the Regulations have been contravened it may order
compensation of between £5,000 and £65,300.
For a full discussion of the relevant law and policy, see the Library’s briefing
paper on blacklisting.8
The Employment Relations Act 1999 (Blacklists) Regulations 2010 prohibit the
compilation, use, sale or supply of trade union blacklists.9
Blacklists are referred to in the Regulations as “prohibited lists”, defined in
regulation 3(2). Prohibited lists are those that contain details of persons who
are/have been members of trade unions or who are taking part/have taken
part in the activities of trade unions, which are compiled with a view to being
used by employers or employment agencies to discriminate in relation to
recruitment or treatment. 10
Regulations 5-6 make it unlawful to refuse to employ a person, or subject a
worker to any detriment, or for an employment agency to refuse an individual
any of its services, for a reason related to a prohibited list.11
The general prohibition is subject to regulation 4, which identifies
circumstances in which a person does not contravene the prohibition (e.g. the
person does not know they are supplying a prohibited list or the list is used in
relation to trade union appointments).

3.1 Remedies
If an employer/agency refuses to employ a person for a discriminatory reason
related to a prohibited list, that person may complain to an employment
tribunal, which may order compensation of between £5,000 and £65,300,
and/or recommend action to reduce the adverse effect on the complainant.12
An employee dismissed for a discriminatory reason related to a prohibited list
may be regarded as unfairly dismissed.13

4 Bullying
Summary
Employers must take reasonable steps to ensure the health, safety and
welfare of their employees, and have a common law duty to take reasonable
steps to protect them from harm.
Bullying amounting to harassment may be a criminal offence. Discriminatory
harassment is unlawful under the Equality Act 2010.
There is no specific law targeted at addressing workplace bullying, but the
following areas of law are relevant: health and safety; the law of negligence;
criminal law; and equality law. The following summarises in turn the
relevance of each.
Section 2 of the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 provides that:
Acas has published
guidance on It shall be the duty of every employer to ensure, so far as is reasonably
practicable, the health, safety and welfare at work of all his employees.16
workplace bullying
and harassment.
Employers must assess risks to employees and take measures to safeguard
their health and safety.17 The Health and Safety Executive has published a
See here for
guide for employers [PDF] on the application of the Act to violence at work.18
guidance aimed at
employees.14 Employers also owe their employees a common law duty to take reasonable
steps to protect them from foreseeable harm to their physical or mental
See here for health. An employer who negligently breaches this duty may be liable for any
resulting physical or psychological injury caused to an employee.
guidance aimed at
managers and
If bullying amounts to a course of conduct constituting harassment as defined
employers.15
in the Protection from Harassment Act 1997, the employer may be vicariously
liable for that harassment if committed by an employee in the course of their
employment. Harassment is not defined by the Act, but given its ordinary
meaning by reference to what a reasonable person would think.
If an employee’s bullying behaviour amounts to harassment under the
Equality Act 2010, the employer may also be vicariously liable. Section 26
defines harassment as engaging in unwanted conduct related to a “protected
characteristic” which has the effect of violating a person’s dignity or creating
an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for
that person.19 The protected characteristics are set out in section 4 of the Act
and include, for example, sex, race and disability (see below section on
‘Equality’). 20

5 Criminal convictions
Summary
Prospective or current employees are not generally required to disclose
details of criminal convictions provided these are “spent”. There are
exceptions to this for certain professions.
For a fuller discussion of the relevant law, see the Library’s briefings on the
Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 197421 and on the retention and disclosure of
criminal records.22
If a conviction is spent under the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, an
employer’s question about previous convictions (e.g. at interview) may be
answered on the basis that it does not relate to spent convictions.23 If a
conviction is not spent, failure to disclose details of it could provide grounds
for refusing employment or a potentially fair reason for dismissing a current
employee.
Aside from a range of serious offences, convictions become spent after the
end of the applicable rehabilitation period.24 The Government has published
guidance on rehabilitation periods and the 1974 Act.25
The serious offences that never become spent are:
• a sentence of imprisonment or custody for life;
• a sentence of imprisonment, youth custody, detention in a young
offender institution or corrective training for a term exceeding 48
months;
• a sentence of preventive detention;
• a sentence of detention during Her Majesty's pleasure or for life under
specified Acts (certain young offenders convicted of grave crimes or
children convicted on indictment); and
• a sentence of imprisonment or detention for public protection, or an
extended sentence for certain violent or sexual offences.26

5.1 Exceptions
The 1974 Act’s provisions excusing disclosure of spent convictions do not
apply to a number of professions or types of work specified in the
Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exceptions) Order 1975, as amended. The
excepted positions generally involve positions of trust, e.g. doctors, lawyers
and accountants. In Scotland the 1974 Act functions slightly differently and
exceptions are instead governed by the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974
(Exclusions and Exceptions) (Scotland) Order 2013.
Safeguarding of vulnerable groups
Work with children or vulnerable adults is treated as an exception where it
meets the definition of “regulated activity” under the Safeguarding
Vulnerable Groups Act 2006 in England & Wales or the Protection of
Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 in Scotland (such as regular
unsupervised teaching of children or personal care for vulnerable adults).
Certain offences legally prevent a person from work in regulated activity.27
A regulated activity provider must ensure that a person is not barred from the
activity in question before permitting them to engage in it.28 They do this by
applying for an enhanced Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) check, which
checks the barred lists and reveals details of spent and unspent convictions,
together with non-conviction information, held by the local police and
considered to be relevant to the role (such as allegations of abuse).
5.2 Disclosure and Barring Service checks
If an employer applies for a DBS check it will ask the job applicant to
complete a form and provide proof of identity, then send the completed form
to the DBS; the DBS will send the certificate to the job applicant; and the
employer can then ask to see it. The DBS eligibility guidance on Gov.uk
provides a detailed overview of the process and which occupations are
eligible for basic, standard or enhanced DBS checks.29

6 Deduction from wages
Summary
If an employer makes an unauthorised deduction from a worker’s wages, the
worker may complain to an employment tribunal.
The tribunal can order repayment and the employer will lose the right to make
the deduction in an authorised manner.
Where an employer has made a series of deductions from wages, the worker’s
ability to claim backdated pay is in most cases limited to two years’ pay.
Section 13(1) of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provides that an employer
cannot lawfully make deductions from wages unless entitled to by the
contract of employment, statute or because the worker has previously
consented in writing to the deduction.
Section 13 does not apply to a deduction if:
• its purpose is to reimburse the employer in respect of an overpayment of
wages or expenses;
• it is in consequence of statutory disciplinary proceedings;
• the deduction is pursuant to the employer’s statutory requirement to pay
a public authority (for example, tax);
• the deduction is for payment to third parties (such as trade unions)
where the worker has agreed to this in writing or contractually;
• the deduction is made by the employer on account of the worker’s
participation in a strike or other industrial action; or
• the purpose of the deduction is the satisfaction of an order of a court or
tribunal, provided the worker has agreed to this in writing.30

6.1 Definition of wages
Section 27 of the 1996 Act defines “wages” for these purposes. The definition
includes:
• any fee, bonus, commission, holiday pay or other emolument referable to
his employment, whether payable under his contract or otherwise;
• statutory sick pay;
• maternity, paternity, adoption, shared parental or parental bereavement
pay;
• a guarantee payment;
• payments for carrying out trade union duties;
• remuneration on suspension on medical or maternity grounds, ending
the supply of an agency worker on maternity grounds;
• any sum payable in pursuance of an order for reinstatement or reengagement;
• any sum payable in pursuance of a tribunal’s order for the continuation
of a contract of employment; and
• remuneration under a protective award.31
The definition excludes:
• advances as loans or advancement of wages;
• expenses;
• payment by way of a pension, allowance or gratuity in connection with
the worker's retirement or as compensation for loss of office;
• payment referable to the worker's redundancy; and
• any payment to the worker otherwise than in his capacity as a worker.32
6.2 Remedies
If an employer makes an unauthorised deduction from wages the employee
may complain to an employment tribunal. The claim must be brought within
three months of the failure to pay the wages. Where a series of deductions
occurs, the time limit runs from the last deduction in the series.
If the claim is well-founded the tribunal will order repayment. Any amount
owing to the employer in respect of the matter in relation to which the
wrongful deduction was made will be treated as reduced by the amount it
was ordered to repay. This means that, if the employer makes the deduction
in contravention of the Act, it repays the deduction and loses the right to
make it again in compliance with the Act (for instance by obtaining written
consent).33

6.3 Two-year limit on back pay claims
The Deduction from Wages (Limitation) Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/3322) came
into force on 8 January 2014, ostensibly to limit potential holiday pay claims
following the Employment Appeal Tribunal’s decision in Bear Scotland Ltd &
Ors -v- Fulton & Ors [2014],34 in which the Tribunal held that non-guaranteed
overtime is part of normal remuneration for the purposes of calculating
holiday pay. The Regulations also affect unlawful deduction from wages
claims, limiting most claims to two years of back pay where a series of
deductions has occurred.35

7 Disciplinary and grievance
Summary
Workers have a statutory right to be accompanied to disciplinary and
grievance hearings. Although there are no prescriptive legislative
requirements as to disciplinary and grievance procedures, ACAS has
produced a statutory Code of Practice which sets out minimum standards
employers should follow. A failure to follow this does not itself open
employers to legal claims, but employment tribunals can take this into
account when deciding cases such as discrimination or unfair dismissal.
Employers often operate disciplinary and grievance procedures although
these may be non-contractual. In some cases, the procedures form part of
the contract of employment: the contract may state this expressly or the
Tribunal may regard the procedures as incorporated into the contract, even if
the contract does not expressly provide for this.36
While there was once a set of legislative requirements for disciplinary and
grievance procedures, these were repealed in 2008.37 Employers are now free
to set their own procedures, subject to the following important provisions:
• workers have a statutory right to be accompanied to disciplinary and
grievance hearings; and
• ACAS has issued a statutory Code of Practice which tribunals can take
into account when determining relevant cases.
Each of these are discussed below.

7.1 The right to be accompanied
Under section 10 of the Employment Relations Act 1999, a worker has a right
to be accompanied to a disciplinary or grievance hearing where the worker:
• is required or invited to attend the meeting; and
• reasonably requests to be accompanied at the hearing.
A disciplinary hearing is a hearing which could result in:
• a formal warning;
• the taking of some other disciplinary action; or
• a confirmation of either of the above (i.e. at an appeal hearing).
A grievance hearing is one which concerns the performance of a duty by an
employer in relation to a worker. 38
Where the right applies, the employer must permit the worker to be
accompanied by a companion of their choice who is either a trade union
official or another of the employer’s workers.
If the companion is not available at the time proposed for the hearing by the
employer, and the worker proposes an alternative, reasonable time, within
five days of that proposed by the employer, the employer must postpone the
hearing to the time proposed by the worker.
The companion is entitled to put the worker’s case, sum it up and respond to
any view expressed during the hearing. They are not entitled to answer
questions on the worker’s behalf, address the hearing contrary to the
worker’s wishes, or contribute in a way that prevents others from doing so. 39
Investigatory meeting
As part of a disciplinary or grievance process, an employer may hold an
investigatory meeting, to establish facts prior to any disciplinary hearing.
Unlike with disciplinary or grievance hearings, there is no statutory right to be
accompanied to investigatory meetings (although the employer’s own
procedure may provide for this).
Contractual right to be accompanied
In addition to the statutory right to be accompanied, a contract of
employment may provide additional rights (for instance, a right to be
accompanied by someone who is neither a co-worker nor a union official). In
rare cases, a court may hold that an employee has a right to be accompanied
by someone who is neither a co-worker nor a union official.40

7.3 Dismissal
If an employee is dismissed following a disciplinary process, and the
employee sues for unfair dismissal, the Tribunal will look at whether the
employer followed its own disciplinary procedures when considering the
procedural fairness of the dismissal, as well as whether or not it followed the
ACAS Code of Practice.
parties. For example, in Stevens v University of Birmingham [2015] EWHC 2300 (QB) the High Court
held that a clinical member of academic staff was entitled to be accompanied by a medically
qualified representative from the Medical Protection Society, who was not a union official.

8 Equality and discrimination
Summary
Part 5 of the Equality Act 2010 prohibits discrimination, harassment and
victimisation at work.
The Act is detailed and accompanied by a substantial body of case law; the
following provides only an outline of the main concepts. For an authoritative
explanation of the Act’s employment provisions, see the Equality and Human
Rights Commission’s Employment Statutory Code of Practice.45
8.1 Protected characteristics
The Equality Act 2010 is the principal equality statute, having repealed and
replaced earlier equality legislation. It prohibits discrimination in relation to
the following “protected characteristics”:
• age;
• disability;
• gender reassignment;
• marriage and civil partnership;
• pregnancy and maternity;
• race;
• religion or belief;
• sex;
• sexual orientation.46

8.2 Direct and indirect discrimination
The Equality Act 2010 identifies two types of discrimination: direct and
indirect.
Direct discrimination occurs when a person, because of a protected
characteristic, treats another less favourably than they would treat those
without the characteristic.47
Indirect discrimination occurs when a person applies a “provision, criterion
or practice” which, although applied to persons with different protected
characteristics (such as men and women) puts one group of persons at a
particular disadvantage (for example, disadvantages women but not men).
Indirect discrimination does not apply to pregnancy and maternity. 48 The
Act’s explanatory notes provide an example of indirect discrimination:
A woman is forced to leave her job because her employer operates a practice
that staff must work in a shift pattern which she is unable to comply with
because she needs to look after her children at particular times of day, and no
allowances are made because of those needs. This would put women (who are
shown to be more likely to be responsible for childcare) at a disadvantage,
and the employer will have indirectly discriminated against the woman unless
the practice can be justified.49
Indirect discrimination (and direct discrimination based on age only) may be
lawful if shown to be a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.50
One example of such a potential justification is given by Citizens Advice:
The fire service requires all job applicants to take a number of physical tests.
This could be indirect discrimination because of age, as older people are less
likely to pass the tests than younger applicants. But the fire service can
probably justify this. Fire fighting is a job which requires great physical
capability. The reason for the test is to make sure candidates are fit enough to
do the job and ensure the proper functioning of the fire service. This is a
legitimate aim. Making candidates take physical tests is a proportionate way
of achieving this aim.51
An employer must not directly or indirectly discriminate against prospective
employees:
• in the arrangements they make for deciding whom to offer employment;
• as to the terms on which they offers the person employment; or
• by not offering that person employment.

An employer must not directly or indirectly discriminate against a current
employee:
• as to the terms of employment;
• in the way they afford access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or
training or for receiving any other benefit, facility or service;
• by dismissing them; or
• by subjecting them to any other detriment.52

8.3 Harassment and victimisation
The Act also prohibits harassment and victimisation.
Harassment is defined as engaging in unwanted conduct related to a
protected characteristic, which has the effect of violating a person’s dignity or
creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive
environment for that person.53
Victimisation is defined as subjecting an individual to detriment because they
have done a “protected act” (or in the belief that they have done so). The
protected acts are:
• bringing proceedings under the Act;
• giving evidence or information in connection with proceedings under the
Act (false evidence or allegations are not protected if given or made in
bad faith);
• doing any other thing for the purposes of or in connection with the Act;
and
• making an allegation that a person has contravened the Act.
• An employer must not victimise prospective or current employees in any
of the ways mentioned above in the discussion of direct and indirect
discrimination.54

8.4 Post-employment
The Equality Act 2010’s protections apply after the employment has ended
provided the discrimination/harassment/victimisation “arises out of and is
closely connected to a relationship which used to exist between” the parties
(such as an employment relationship). An example of this might be the
provision of a negative employment reference.55

8.5 Equal pay
In addition to the general prohibition of discrimination, the Act deals
specifically in Part 5 Chapter 3 with equality of terms between men and
women.
In relation to equal pay, section 66 is the most important. It provides that, if
the contractual terms of a person’s work are less favourable than those of a
comparator of the opposite sex, the terms are modified so as not to be less
favourable.
Section 77 makes unenforceable any term in a contract that tries to to prevent
employees from making a ‘relevant pay disclosure’, defined as follows:
A disclosure is a relevant pay disclosure if made for the purpose of enabling
the person who makes it, or the person to whom it is made, to find out whether
or to what extent there is, in relation to the work in question, a connection
between pay and having (or not having) a particular protected
characteristic.56
The provision was designed to prevent confidentiality clauses from stopping
employees finding out about pay inequalities.

8.6 Disability
Discrimination arising from disability
Section 15 of the 2010 Act prohibits treating a disabled worker unfavourably
because of something arising in consequence of their disability (rather than
simply for having a disability). For example, dismissing a worker with multiple
sclerosis for taking extended disability-related sick leave.
An employer does not contravene this prohibition if they can show that they
did not know, and could not reasonably have been expected to know, that the
employee had the disability. Nor do they contravene it if they can show that
the treatment was a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.58
Reasonable adjustments
Broadly, an employer is under a statutory duty to take such steps as are
reasonable in the circumstances to:
• avoid putting disabled persons at a substantial disadvantage where a
provision, criterion or practice would put them at that disadvantage
compared with non-disabled persons;
• remove, alter or provide means of avoiding physical features (e.g. stairs)
where that feature puts a disabled person at a substantial disadvantage
compared with non-disabled persons; or
• provide an auxiliary aid where a disabled person would, but for the
provision of that aid, be put at a substantial disadvantage in comparison
with persons who are not disabled.59
• A “substantial” disadvantage is one that is “more than minor or trivial”.60

9 Facility time
Summary
“Facility time” is time off from a person’s normal work to undertake trade
union duties, learning development or activities. There is a statutory right to
paid time off for trade union “duties” or training and to unpaid time off for
union “activities”.
Sections 168-173 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act
1992 provide statutory rights to time off for union duties and activities.
Representatives of recognised unions are entitled to paid time off to carry out
specified trade union duties.61 The duties are set out in section 168 as being
“any duties … as such an official, concerned with”:
• collective bargaining negotiations with the employer;
• the performance on behalf of employees of functions related to or
connected with collective bargaining which the employer has agreed
may be performed by the union;
• receipt of information from and consultation by the employer concerning
redundancies;
• negotiations about - or the performance on behalf of employees of
functions connected with – agreements to vary employees’ contractual
terms where there is a transfer of an undertaking, and the transferor is
subject to insolvency proceedings; and
• undergoing industrial relations training, approved by the TUC or his
union and related to performance of the above duties.
Union learning representatives are also entitled to paid time off for the
following purposes in relation to union members:
• analysing learning or training needs;
• providing information and advice about learning or training matters;
• arranging learning or training;
• promoting the value of learning or training; and
• consulting the employer about carrying on any such activities in relation
to such members of the trade union.62
• Employers are also required to permit employees to take a reasonable
amount of unpaid time off to take part in certain union activities.63 These
might include, for example, attending union meetings, participating in
union elections or attending conferences.
The amount of paid time off for both duties and activities is qualified by the
following:
The amount of time off which an employee is to be permitted to take … and the
purposes for which, the occasions on which and any conditions subject to
which time off may be so taken are those that are reasonable in all the
circumstances having regard to any relevant provision of a Code of Practice
issued by ACAS or the Secretary of State.64
The current ACAS Code of Practice on Time Off for Trade Union Duties and
Activities has been in force since 1 January 2010.65 Employment tribunals can
take a failure to follow the Code of Practice into account when deciding
relevant cases.

10 Family-related leave
Summary
Those classed as employees may be entitled to maternity leave, which lasts for
up to 52 weeks; maternity pay lasts for up to 39 weeks.
The right to adoption leave/pay operates in largely the same way as maternity
leave/pay.
Fathers or one part of an adoptive couple (or one parent in a surrogacy
arrangement) may be entitled to paternity leave of 1-2 weeks.
A mother or primary adopter may curtail her maternity/adoption leave and pay
and transfer to Shared Parental Leave and Shared Parental Pay. The remaining
balance of leave and pay can then be shared in blocks between the parents.
Employees with one year’s continuous service may be entitled to 18 weeks’
unpaid parental leave in respect of each child under 18, up to four weeks of
which may be taken per year.
Pregnant women are entitled to paid time off for ante-natal care; prospective
fathers (or someone in a ‘qualifying relationship’ with a pregnant woman/her
expected child) are entitled to unpaid time off.
10.1 Maternity leave and pay
The right to maternity leave is set out in Part 8 of the Employment Rights Act
1996 and Part 2 of the Maternity and Parental Leave etc. Regulations 1999.
Maternity leave is a ‘day one’ right in that all eligible employees are entitled
to it irrespective of how long they have worked for their employer. There are
three types: compulsory maternity leave, ordinary maternity leave and
additional maternity leave:
• Compulsory maternity leave lasts for two weeks from the date of
childbirth (four weeks in the case of factory workers), during which the
employer must not permit the mother to work.67
• Ordinary maternity leave lasts for 26 weeks, inclusive of the period of
compulsory maternity leave.
• Additional maternity leave commences on the day after the last day of
ordinary maternity leave, and lasts for 26 weeks.68
The distinction between ordinary and additional maternity leave relates to the
employee’s right to return to the same job. If the employee returns to work
during ordinary maternity leave she is entitled to the same job, with the same
terms and conditions. If she returns to work during additional maternity leave
she is entitled to return to the same job or, if it is not reasonably practicable
for the employer to permit her to return to that job, to another job which is
appropriate for her to do in the circumstances.69
In order to qualify for statutory maternity pay (SMP) the worker must have
worked for the same employer for 26 weeks as at the 15th week before the
expected week of childbirth, earn £123 per week (or an average of £123 per
week if the hours vary from week to week), notify her employer at least 28
days before she wants the payments to start and have given her employer
proof that she is pregnant.
SMP is paid for up to 39 weeks:
• for the first six weeks it is paid at a weekly rate of 90 per cent of average
weekly earnings (the “enhanced rate”); and
• for the next 33 weeks it is 90 per cent of average weekly earnings or
£184.03, whichever is lower (the “flat rate”).
10.2 Maternity Allowance
Maternity Allowance is available to individuals that do not qualify for SMP
(such as the self-employed or recently unemployed). Maternity Allowance is
paid for up to 39 weeks at the flat rate, although the amount an individual will
receive depends on their eligibility.70

10.3 Maternity suspension
Under regulations 3 and 16 of the Management of Health and Safety at Work
Regulations 1999 employers are required to assess work-related risks posed
to new or expectant mothers. If an employer is unable to avoid an identified
risk it must either alter the employee’s working conditions or hours of work,
or, if it is not reasonable to do that or doing that would not avoid the risk,
suspend the employee on full pay for as long as it is necessary to avoid the
risk.71

10.4 Adoption leave and pay
The right to adoption leave is set out in Part 8 of the Employment Rights Act
1996 and Part 3 of the Paternity and Adoption Leave Regulations 2002.
Adoptive parents (or parents in a surrogacy arrangement) may nominate one
parent to be the ‘primary adopter’, who may be entitled to adoption leave.
The other parent may be entitled to paternity leave.
The operation of adoption leave and pay is now in line with maternity leave
and pay, as set out above.
The right to adoption leave and pay is available to parents of a newly placed
child, not those adopting a child they are fostering (e.g. through an adoption
order).72 This is because the leave (as with maternity and paternity leave) is
designed to “provide time for the adoptive child and parent to adjust to their
new relationships”.73

10.5 Paternity leave and pay
The right to paternity leave is set out in Part 8 of the Employment Rights Act
1996 and Part 2 of the Paternity and Adoption Leave Regulations 2002.
Paternity leave lasts for one or two weeks, at the parent’s choice, which can
be taken in either one two-week block or two one-week blocks, within the first
year of the child’s arrival or due date if the baby arrives early. Employees
have to give 28 days’ notice for each week of leave.
To qualify for paternity leave an individual must have been employed with the
same employer for not less than 26 weeks as at the end of the 15th week
before the expected week of the child’s birth.74
Paternity leave is available to both men and women, provided the individual
in question is parenting a child and is the partner of the mother or adopter.
The rights to paternity leave apply to the member of an adopting couple who
is not eligible for adoption leave and pay (the partner who is not the
“primary” adopter).
Formerly, there were two types: ordinary paternity leave (one or two weeks)
and additional paternity leave (up to 26 weeks), although the latter was
abolished for parents of children due after 5 April 2015, and replaced by
Shared Parental Leave and Shared Parental Pay (see below).
Paternity pay is paid at the flat rate of £184.03 or 90 per cent of average
weekly earnings, whichever is lower. In order to qualify for paternity pay the
individual must earn at least £123 per week before tax.75

10.6 Shared Parental Leave and Pay
The Children and Families Act 2014 amended Part 8 of the Employment Rights
Act 1996, creating rights to Shared Parental Leave (SPL) and Shared Parental
Pay (SPP).76 A substantial body of regulations made under the Act implement
the scheme.77
SPL and SPP become available if the mother or primary adopter choses to
The Department for
shorten their period of maternity or adoption leave and pay (excluding the
Business, and Trade period of compulsory maternity leave, which cannot be shortened). The
has published a unused balance from the 52 weeks’ leave and 39 weeks’ pay can then be
shared in blocks between the parents. The parents can take the blocks of
technical guide to
leave at different times or concurrently, although must provide their
SPL and SPP for
employers with eight weeks’ notice before beginning a block.
employers.78
A mother claiming Maternity Allowance (see 10.2 above), such as a selfemployed or recently unemployed mother, may create a right for her partner
to access SPL/SPP by curtailing her Maternity Allowance.

10.7 Parental leave
The right to unpaid parental leave, separate from the other forms of leave
discussed above, is provided in Part 8 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 and
Part 3 of the Maternity and Parental Leave etc. Regulations 1999.
An employee with at least one year’s continuous service may be eligible for
unpaid parental leave if they have parental responsibility for a child.79 The
employee will be entitled to up eighteen weeks’ leave in respect of any
individual child to take at any time up to the child’s 18th birthday.80 The leave
may be taken in one-week blocks, up to a maximum of four weeks per year.81

10.8 Ante-natal care
The right to time off in respect of ante-natal care is provided in Part 6 of the
Employment Rights Act 1996.
A pregnant employee/agency worker is entitled to paid time off to attend an
ante-natal care appointment made on the advice of a registered medical
practitioner, midwife or registered nurse.82 Remuneration is paid at the
appropriate hourly rate, determined either by dividing a week’s pay by the
number of normal working hours in a week, or by reference to the method in
section 56 of the Employment Rights Act 1996.
The Children and Families Act 2014 amended the Employment Rights Act 1996,
introducing a right to unpaid time off to accompany a pregnant woman
“when she attends by appointment at any place for the purpose of receiving
ante-natal care”.83 Employees/agency workers with a “qualifying
relationship” with the expectant mother or child are entitled to a maximum of
two periods of time off, each limited to six and a half hours. Qualifying
relationships include, for example, spouses, prospective fathers and persons
in enduring family relationships with pregnant women (partners).84

10.9 Time off for dependants
Section 57A of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provides employees with the
right to a reasonable amount of unpaid time off to “take action” which is
“necessary”:
(a) to provide assistance on an occasion when a dependant falls ill, gives birth
or is injured or assaulted,
(b) to make arrangements for the provision of care for a dependant who is ill or
injured,
(c) in consequence of the death of a dependant,
(d) because of the unexpected disruption or termination of arrangements for
the care of a dependant, or
(e) to deal with an incident which involves a child of the employee and which
occurs unexpectedly in a period during which an educational establishment
which the child attends is responsible for him85
In order for this right to time off to apply, the employee must tell their
employer the reason for the absence as soon as reasonably practicable; if
this is before the absence, the employer must be told how long the employee
expects to be absent.
The right is to “take action” and therefore it does not apply in circumstances
where action is unnecessary (e.g. bereavement leave – see part 10.10 below).
Section 57A(3) defines “dependant” as a spouse/civil partner, child, parent or
a person in the same household (other than the employee’s lodger, tenant,
boarder or employee).
For subsections (a) and (b) above, the definition of dependant includes any
person who reasonably relies on the employee for assistance when they fall ill
or are injured/assaulted, or who relies on the employee to arrange care in the
event of illness or injury. For subsection (d), “dependant” includes any person
who reasonably relies on the employee to make arrangements for the
provision of care.86
Remedies
Section 57B of the Employment Rights Act 1996 entitles an employee to
complain to an employment tribunal if their employer has unreasonably
refused permission for time off under section 57A. If the complaint is wellfounded, the tribunal must make a declaration to that effect and may order
such compensation as it considers just and equitable, having regard to the
employer’s default and any loss sustained by the employee attributable to the
refusal.

10.10 Bereavement leave and pay
Regulations passed under powers granted by the Parental Bereavement
(Leave and Pay) Act 2018 created new entitlements to parental bereavement
leave and parental bereavement pay.87 These rights came into force on 6 April
2020 in Great Britain. They apply where a child dies before they turn 18 or
where someone pregnant suffers a stillbirth after 24 weeks of pregnancy.
Parental bereavement leave and pay are available to employees who are the
baby’s biological or adoptive parents or the partner of such a parent.
Parental bereavement leave is available to all such employees from day one
of employment. Parental bereavement pay is available to employees who
have been in continuous employment for 26 weeks with their employer and
earn at least £123 per week on average before tax.88
Eligible parents can take up to two weeks of leave for each child who has died
or was stillborn, starting anytime from the date of the death or stillbirth and
finishing within 56 weeks of the date of the death of stillbirth. It can be taken
in blocks of one week at a time. Employees must notify their employer of their
intention to take leave and complete a declaration to claim statutory
parental bereavement pay. Statutory bereavement pay is paid at a rate of
£184.03 a week or 90% of average weekly earnings (whichever is lower).89
10.11 Carers leave
As of 6 April 2024, all employees are entitled to take one week of unpaid leave
each year if they have caring responsibilities.
This applies if they are caring for a spouse, civil partner, child, parent or other
dependant who requires care because of a disability, old age, or any illness
or injury likely to require at least three months of care. The leave entitlement
is available from the first day of employment with no qualifying period.
This entitlement was created by the Carer’s Leave Act 2023 and the
associated Carer’s Leave Regulations 2024.

11 Fixed-term employees
Summary
The law protects fixed-term employees from being treated less favourably
than comparable permanent employees and, in certain circumstances,
entitles them to permanent contracts after four years.
A fixed-term employee is one who works under a fixed-term contract, defined
in the Fixed-term Employees (Prevention of Less Favourable Treatment)
Regulations 2002 as an employment contract that terminates:
• on expiry of a specific term;
• on completion of a specific task; or
• on the occurrence or non-occurrence of any other specific event (other
than attaining the employer’s retirement age).
Fixed-term employees must not be treated – because they are fixed-term
employees - less favourably than comparable permanent employees:
• as regards the terms of their contracts; or
• by being subjected to detriment by any act or deliberate omission of their
employers.90
This includes, in particular, a right not to be treated less favourably in terms
of qualifying periods relating to conditions of service, training opportunities
and opportunities to secure permanent employment.
An employee will be a “comparable permanent employee” in relation to the
fixed-term employee if, at the time of the alleged less favourable treatment,
both employees are employed by the same employer and engaged in the
same or broadly similar work (having regard, where relevant, to respective
skills and qualifications).91
The right applies only if the employer is unable to justify the less favourable
treatment on objective grounds. One of the ways in which an employer can
objectively justify less favourable treatment is if the terms of the fixed-term
employee’s contract are, taken as a whole, at least as favourable as those of
a comparable permanent employee’s.92
A fixed-term employee is entitled to receive, within 21 days, a written
statement of reasons for any less favourable treatment.93

11.1 Successive fixed-term contracts
Where, for a period of four or more years, an employee is employed under a
long fixed-term contract which is renewed, or successive fixed-term
contracts, the employee will become a permanent employee. However, this
will not occur if the employer can objectively justify the use of the fixed-term
contract.94 One such justification might be another legal requirement, such as
in a case where teachers were employed at a European school for a maximum
of nine years as allowed by Regulations for Members of the Seconded Staff of
the European Schools 1996 – the Supreme Court held that the use of fixed
term contracts beyond four years was objectively justified in this case.95
An employee who considers that, by virtue of this right, they are a permanent
employee, may request in writing a written statement confirming this or
setting out reasons why the contract remains fixed-term. The employer must
provide this within 21 days of the request.96

11.2 Protection from dismissal
The Regulations set out a range of reasons for which dismissal will be
regarded as unfair. The usual qualifying period for unfair dismissal does not
apply to such cases.
The unfair reasons for dismissal are set out in regulation 6(3); broadly, they
concern dismissal because the employee has asserted or refused to forgo
rights conferred by the Regulations.

11.3 Remedies
A fixed-term employee may complain to an employment tribunal if they are
treated less favourably than a comparable permanent employee or dismissed
for one of the above reasons. Any such complaint will be subject to the usual
three-month time limit, which may be waived if the tribunal considers it just
and equitable to do so.
If the tribunal finds a claim well-founded it may:
• make a declaration as to the employer and employee’s respective rights;
• award such compensation as it feels is just and equitable (although
compensation for “injury to feelings” is unavailable); and
• recommend that the employer acts, within a specific period, to remove
or reduce the adverse effect of the matter complained of.
If the employer fails, without reasonable justification, to comply with one of
the tribunal’s recommendations, the tribunal may increase the amount of
compensation.97

12 Flexible working
Summary
All employees have the right to request flexible working; a change to their
hours, times or location of work (for example; reducing working time, working
from home or working compressed hours).
For a full discussion of the relevant law and policy, see the Library’s briefing
paper on flexible working.98
The right to request flexible working and have it considered is provided by the
Flexible Working Regulations 2014.
To benefit from the Regulations, the flexible working application must be in
writing; state whether the employee has previously made any such
application to the employer and, if so, when; and be dated.
The employer must deal with the request in a reasonable manner and
respond within two months, unless a longer period is agreed by the employer
and employee. The employer may only refuse the application because of one
or more valid reasons from the following list:
• the burden of additional costs;
• detrimental effect on ability to meet customer demand;
• inability to reorganise work among existing staff;
• inability to recruit additional staff;
• detrimental impact on quality;
• detrimental impact on performance;
• insufficiency of work during the periods the employee proposes to work;
or
• planned structural changes.
If refusing the request, employers must explain their reason for doing so.
Employees can make up to two such requests per year.
The employer may treat the employee’s application as withdrawn if the
employee without good reason fails to attend both the first meeting arranged
by the employer to discuss the application and the next meeting arranged for
that purpose.
Acas has a Code of Practice on flexible working requests, which employment
tribunals can penalise employers for not following.99

12.1 Remedies
If the employer fails to comply with its obligations, the employee may present
a complaint to an employment tribunal. The tribunal may make an order for
reconsideration of the application and award compensation of such amount
as it considers just and equitable, not exceeding eight weeks’ pay. A week’s
pay is subject to the statutory maximum set annually by regulations. The most
recently prescribed limits are:
Date Maximum amount of one week’s pay
6 April 2024 – 5 April 2025 £ 700
6 April 2023 – 5 April 2024 £ 643
6 April 2022 – 5 April 2023 £ 571

13 Holiday
Summary
Workers are entitled to 5.6 weeks’ annual leave during the leave year. The
leave must be paid at the worker’s normal rate of remuneration, factoring in,
where relevant, overtime and commission payments.
There is no statutory right to leave on bank/public holidays; a worker’s right,
or lack thereof, to leave on these days derives from their contract. For further
information on bank holidays and employment, see the Library’s briefing
paper on the subject.100
Under the Working Time Regulations 1998 workers are entitled to 5.6 weeks
paid annual leave. For those working five days per week, this amounts to 28
days’ paid leave, inclusive of public holidays (5.6 x 5 = 28).101 Part-time
workers are also entitled to 5.6 weeks’ leave. For example, working three days
per week entitles one to 16.8 days’ leave (5.6 x 3 = 16.8).
The statutory entitlement does not increase beyond 28 days for those working
more than five days per week. Contracts of employment may, of course, allow
provides a holiday longer periods of leave.
entitlement
The “leave year” for the purposes of the Regulations is that specified in either
calculator
the contract of employment or other relevant written agreement. If no dates
are specified, the leave year begins on the date employment commenced
(unless it commenced prior to 1 October 1998, in which case the leave year
begins on 1 October).102
Statutory annual leave must be paid at the worker’s normal rate of
remuneration. The question of how to calculate this has been a source of
repeated litigation both domestically and at the European Court of Justice.
Broadly, the uncertainty stemmed from the difficulty in squaring the method
used under the 1998 Regulations to calculate pay with that required by the EU
Directive they implement.103 Case law has now confirmed that workers are
entitled to remuneration reflecting the overtime they would normally work
and commission they would normally earn. In the latter case, this may require
payment following the period of leave, representing commission that would
have been earned had the worker not been on leave.
The Employment Rights (Amendment, Revocation and Transitional Provision)
Regulations 2023 have re-permitted the previously unlawful practice of using
rolled-up holiday pay for irregular hour and part-year workers, from April
2024 onwards. This effectively means employers of such workers can add
additional holiday pay onto such workers’ hourly salaries to compensate for
the fact that they may not receive any holiday pay during their actual times of
annual leave. It is normally calculated at a rate of 12.07% on top of a worker’s
usual hourly rate. See the Acas guidance on Rolled-up holiday pay for further
details.
Annual leave accrues during sickness absence and up to four weeks of the 5.6
week entitlement can be carried over into the next leave year if absence
prevents the worker from taking leave. If a worker falls ill while on annual
leave, they may bring an end to the leave and take it later.

13.1 Bank and public holidays
Strictly, “bank holidays” are those fixed by statute - the Banking and Financial
Dealings Act 1971 - as days when financial dealings may be suspended. The
term “bank” holiday is used interchangeably with “public” holiday. For all
practical purposes there is no difference. There is, however, an academic
difference between bank holidays derived from statute and public holidays at
common law (such as Christmas Day in England and Wales). Schedule 1 to the
Act stipulates those days which are to be bank holidays in England and
Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. The Act also gives Her Majesty the
power to appoint additional days as bank holidays by Royal Proclamation, as
happened for example with the additional bank holiday to celebrate the
Platinum Jubilee on 3 June 2022.104
A worker’s right, or lack thereof, to leave on these days derives only from their
employment contract. The 5.6 week statutory holiday entitlement for all
workers is inclusive of bank holidays, but does not have to be taken on those
days specifically. An employer may require a worker to attend work on a bank
holiday if entitled to do so by either their contract of employment or industry
custom. In industries where it is customary to get bank holidays off, and
absent any contractual term specifying employees can be asked to work
rise to a challenge to the Regulations’ compliance with the Directive, case law on which had
established that workers must be paid their “normal” rate of remuneration.
those days, there is some case law suggesting that employees could be
entitled to paid leave as an implied contractual term.105
There are typically eight bank/public holidays a year in England and Wales,
nine in Scotland and ten in Northern Ireland:
England and Wales Scotland Northern Ireland
New Year’s Day (2) New Year’s Day (1) New Year’s Day (2)
2 January (1)
St Patrick’s Day (1)
Good Friday (3) Good Friday (1) Good Friday (3)
Easter Monday (1) Easter Monday (1)
First Monday in May (2) First Monday in May (2) First Monday in May (2)
Last Monday in May (1) Last Monday in May (1) Last Monday in May (1)
Battle of the Boyne
(Orangemen’s Day) (4)
First Monday in August (1)
Last Monday in August (1) Last Monday in August (1)
St Andrew’s Day (1)
Christmas Day (3) Christmas Day (1) Christmas Day (3)
Boxing Day (1) Boxing Day (1) Boxing Day (1)

14 Illegal working
Summary
Employers may be liable in civil or criminal law if they employ a person in
breach of immigration restrictions. If a person works in breach of immigration
conditions they will be committing a criminal offence. For further information,
see the Library’s briefing paper on the subject.106
Employers’ legal responsibilities to prevent illegal working are set out in the
Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, as amended by the
Immigration Act 2016, together with related regulations. Section 15 of the Act
provides for the imposition of a civil penalty where a person employs an
illegal worker. “Illegal worker” is not an expressly defined statutory term, but
is used as shorthand to describe employees who lack immigration permission:
It is contrary to this section to employ an adult subject to immigration control
if—
(a) he has not been granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom, or
(b) his leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom—
(i) is invalid,
(ii) has ceased to have effect (whether by reason of curtailment,
revocation, cancellation, passage of time or otherwise), or
(iii) is subject to a condition preventing him from accepting the
employment.107
Employing an illegal worker contrary to section 15 carries a maximum penalty
of £60,000 per illegal worker.108 An employer will have a statutory excuse
against paying the penalty if it can show it has carried out the necessary
document checks.109 But if the employer knows that the employee does not
have the right to work, it will not have a statutory excuse (regardless of
whether it conducted any document checks).
In addition to potential civil liability, section 21 of the 2006 Act makes it a
criminal offence to employ someone while knowing, or having reasonable
cause to believe, that the employee is an illegal worker. The maximum
sentence on indictment is five years’ imprisonment and/or an unlimited fine.110
A person who works while disqualified from working because of their
immigration status and knows or has reasonable cause to believe they are
disqualified from working due to their immigration status also commits an
offence.111 This offence is punishable on summary conviction by an unlimited
fine or up to six months’ imprisonment A Magistrates’ Court may commit an
illegal worker to a Crown Court with a view to confiscating gains under the
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. It is separately an offence to knowingly breach a
condition of leave, which includes restrictions on work.112

15 Industrial action
Summary
Employees do not enjoy a general “right” to strike in domestic law. Rather,
unions have statutory immunity from the common law consequences of
industrial action, provided statutory criteria are met. Employees participating
in immune strikes are protected from dismissal.
See part 5 of the Library briefing Trade unions and industrial relations for a
more detailed discussion of this issue.
Under the common law, an individual who goes on strike is generally in
breach of their contract of employment. A trade union that organises a strike,
in the absence of legal protections discussed below, will almost certainly
commit a tort (a civil wrong) such as inducement of a breach of contract or
conspiracy to do an unlawful act. The remedies for torts are primarily
damages and injunctions.
A series of Acts of Parliament, starting in 1906, and currently consolidated in
the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 (TULRCA), as
amended by the Trade Union Act 2016, granted unions and union officials
immunity from liability for these torts. The right to strike is therefore limited to
those cases for which immunity is granted by statute, otherwise workers and
unions may be at risk of legal action.
To benefit from statutory immunity the strike must, among other things, be “in
contemplation or furtherance of a trade dispute”113 and be authorised by a
properly conducted strike ballot (strikes solely for political reasons will not be
protected). A union’s failure to comply with the (many and detailed) statutory
prerequisites for immunity may provide grounds for an employer to seek an
injunction to prevent the strike.

15.1 Strike ballots
The statutory provisions governing industrial action ballots and notices are
contained in TULRCA, sections 226 to 235.
For the union to be protected from liability it must conduct a secret postal
ballot of “all the members of the trade union who it is reasonable at the time
of the ballot for the union to believe will be induced by the union to take part”
in the strike, and no others.114 Minor and accidental errors will be
disregarded. The voting paper must contain at least one of two questions:
• “a question … which requires the person answering it to say, by
answering “Yes” or “No”, whether he is prepared to take part or, as the
case may be, to continue to take part in a strike.
• “a question … which requires the person answering it to say, by
answering “Yes” or “No”, whether he is prepared to take part or, as the
case may be, to continue to take part in industrial action short of a
strike”.115
In order for the vote to grant immunity in the case of industrial action, the
following must be satisfied:
• a majority of those who vote must vote in favour of the action;
• at least 50% of those entitled to vote in the ballot must have turned out
to vote; and
• if the majority of those who vote are normally engaged in the provision of
“important public services”, at least 40% of those entitled to vote must
vote in favour of the action.116

15.2 Protection from dismissal
Under TULRCA, section 238A (inserted by Schedule 5 to the Employment
Relations Act 1999) an employee dismissed for participation in statutorily
immune industrial action will be regarded as unfairly dismissed, providing
one of the following is true:
• the employee is dismissed within 12 weeks beginning with the first day on
which the employee starts to take the action;
• the employee is dismissed after 12 weeks, but the employee had stopped
taking action before the end of that period;
• the employee is dismissed after 12 weeks, the employee had not stopped
taking the action before the end of that period, but the employer had not
taken such procedural steps as would have been reasonable for the
purposes of resolving the dispute.
In all the above cases, the 12 week period is extended to reflect any period
during which the employee is locked out by their employer.
Outside of the above protection, under section 238, a tribunal cannot
determine an unfair dismissal case relating to a statutorily immune strike, so
long as the employer dismissed all the employees participating in the strike
and has not re-engaged any of them within three months, beginning with the
date of the dismissal (if any employees were re-engaged, an employee not reengaged will be able to bring a claim).117
By contrast, the employer may dismiss any employee for participating in
certain unofficial industrial action (such as action not authorised or endorsed
by the employee’s union) and the employee will have no right to complain of
unfair dismissal.118

16 Insolvency
Summary
Employees who are owed money when their employers become insolvent are
entitled to reclaim certain debts from the government Insolvency Service and,
where relevant, HMRC. They may also be able to recover money as
preferential creditors of their employers.
For a full discussion of the relevant law, see the Library’s briefing paper on
employee rights on insolvency.119
The Employment Rights Act 1996 and Insolvency Act 1986 provide a number of
avenues via which an employee might seek payment of debts owed to them by
an insolvent employer. The avenues fall into two broad categories.
First, the Secretary of State must pay certain debts to employees, effected via
the Redundancy Payments Service. Aside from in the case of unpaid
provides a redundancy pay, the Redundancy Payments Service will only pay these debts
collection of forms if the employer has become formally insolvent.
and guidance for
Second, employees may seek payment from the company’s assets through
those wishing to
insolvency proceedings or via administrators.
make claims
The options open to the employee may be summarised as follows:
through the
Insolvency Service
• The Employment Rights Act 1996 requires the Secretary of State to pay
certain debts owed to employees, including arrears of pay and unpaid
redundancy pay. This is paid out from the National Insurance Fund via
the Redundancy Payments Service.120
• Statutory payments such as statutory sick pay and maternity, paternity
or adoption pay may be covered by HMRC.
• The State may also cover unpaid employer’s contributions for employees
who belongs to occupational pension schemes, and, under the Pensions
Act 2004, pension schemes may be protected by the Pension Protection
Fund.
• If an employer is put into administration, employees may have claims
against the administrator/administrative receiver.
• If the employer is put into liquidation, employees may have claims
against the insolvent estate.
• Employees are treated as preferential creditors under the Insolvency Act
1986 in respect of unpaid wages owed in the four months prior to the
insolvency order (subject to an £800 limit), and in respect of the total
amount of unpaid holiday pay.121

17 National Minimum Wage
Summary
The national minimum wage (NMW) applies to most workers and involves
annually updated minimum hourly rates of pay. The national living wage is
the name given to the higher minimum wage applying only to those aged 23
and over. See the Library briefing on the National Minimum Wage: rates and
enforcement for more information.122
The framework of the NMW is set out by the National Minimum Wage Act 1998
and supplemented by various regulations which were consolidated in the
National Minimum Wage Regulations 2015. The NMW rates are provided in
regulations made by the Secretary of State with parliamentary approval,
based on annual recommendations made by the Low Pay Commission
(LPC).123
The apprentice rate applies to apprentices under 19, in their first year of level
2 or 3 apprenticeships; all other apprentices are entitled to the NMW rate for
their age. Both this and the under 18 rate should be read bearing in mind that
only those over compulsory school age (over 16) are entitled to the NMW.

17.1 Enforcement
The right to be paid the NMW takes effect as part of a worker’s contract; if
underpaid, the worker may enforce the right either in an employment tribunal
or the civil courts.
HMRC also enforces the NMW and can issue notices of underpayment to
underpaying employers. A notice of underpayment must require the employer
to pay to the Secretary of State a specified financial penalty within a 28-day
period. The penalty is currently set at 200% of the total arrears owed to all
workers to whom the notice relates, subject to a maximum of £20,000 per
worker.124 The penalty is discounted for prompt payment: the employer need
only pay 50% of the penalty if it is paid within 14 days, beginning with the day
the notice was served.
There is an associated system of naming and shaming employers that breach
NMW law, which is designed to deter employers from underpaying workers.
Under this system, employers issued with a notice of underpayment for
arrears of at least £500 are named via a Department for Business and Trade
press notice.
In the most serious cases of (for example) refusal or wilful neglect to pay the
NMW, there is the possibility of criminal enforcement under section 31 of the
1998 Act, with the potential for an unlimited fine.
Acas guidance on the NMW makes clear that workers who have been
underpaid the minimum wage must choose either to complain to HMRC or
bring an employment tribunal claim, but not both, saying “They cannot take
the same issue through 2 legal processes.”126

18 Notice
Summary
Employers are required to provide employees with details of contractual
notice periods.
The Employment Rights Act 1996 sets out statutory minimum periods of
notice. Employees are normally entitled to pay for time worked during their
notice.
Employees may waive their right to notice or accept payment in lieu of notice.
In certain circumstances, the conduct of an employee may entitle the
employer to dismiss them without notice.

18.1 Terms of notice periods
Section 1(4)(e) of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provides that the statement
of initial employment terms the employer must give to the employee within
two months of beginning employment must include details of “the length of
notice which the employee is obliged to give and entitled to receive to
terminate his contract of employment”.127

18.2 Minimum notice periods
Although contracts of employment usually specify a period of notice, the
notice in fact given by an employer to an employee must not fall below the
statutory minimum period of notice. Section 86(1) of the Employment Rights
Act 1996 provides the following minimum notice periods:
• one week’s notice for employment exceeding one month but less than
two years;
• one week’s notice for each year of continuous employment if the
employee’s period of continuous employment is between two and twelve
years; and
• twelve weeks’ notice for employment of twelve years or more.128
Section 86(2) provides that an employee who has been employed for one
month or more must provide their employer with at least one week’s notice.129
As with notice provided by the employer, the contract of employment may
(and often does) stipulate that the employee must give a longer period of
notice.

18.3 Pay during notice
Employees are normally entitled to pay for time worked during their notice,
including pay for any part of normal working hours for which the employee is:
• ready, willing and able to work but no work is provided for them by the
employer;
• incapable of work because of sickness or injury;
• absent from work wholly or partly because of pregnancy or childbirth, or
on adoption leave, shared parental leave, parental leave or paternity
leave; or
• absent from work in accordance with the terms of their employment
relating to holidays.130
An employee may waive their right to notice or accept payment in lieu of
notice (‘PILON’). The contract may provide for this possibility; if it does not,
preventing the employee from working out the notice period may constitute a
breach of contract, although the payment in lieu of notice will often provide
adequate compensation for the employee.

18.4 Dismissal without notice
In some cases it will be lawful to dismiss an employee without notice. This will
usually be the case where the employee commits a repudiatory breach of
contract; that is, a breach that is sufficiently serious to entitle the employer to
treat the contract as at an end.
Summary dismissal (i.e. dismissal without notice) is usually a response to
gross misconduct. There is no definitive list of conduct falling within this
description; it will depend on the circumstances of the employment. However,
there are some types of behaviour generally considered to be gross
misconduct:
• theft or fraud
• physical violence or bullying
• deliberate and serious damage to property
• serious misuse of an organisation’s property or name
• deliberately accessing internet sites containing pornographic, offensive
or obscene material
• serious insubordination
• unlawful discrimination or harassment
• bringing the organisation into serious disrepute
• serious incapability at work brought on by alcohol or illegal drugs
• causing loss, damage or injury through serious negligence
• a serious breach of health and safety rules
• a serious breach of confidence.131
If the conduct is sufficiently serious to end the contract, the employer will not
be in breach of contract by summarily dismissing the employee. In some
cases the contract may define types of conduct which the employer regards
as gross misconduct.
If the employee qualifies for unfair dismissal rights (i.e. has worked
continuously for two years) their contractual rights will coexist with the
statutory right not to be unfairly dismissed. While summary dismissal in
response to gross misconduct might not breach the contract, the dismissal
might nonetheless be unfair, particularly if the employer fails to follow a fair
dismissal procedure (see below section 28 of this briefing on unfair dismissal).

19 Part-time workers
Summary
Part-time workers have the right not to be treated by their employers less
favourably than comparable full-time workers.
Specific rights are provided for part-time workers by the Part-time Workers
(Prevention of Less Favourable Treatment) Regulations 2000, as amended,
which implemented EU Directive 97/81/EC, as extended to the UK by Directive
98/23/EC. These regulations are now part of assimilated law since the UK’s
departure from the EU. The Regulations simply define a part-time worker as
one who is “not identifiable as a full-time worker”, taking into account the
“custom and practice of the employer”.132 The Regulations provide the
following right to part-time workers from the first day of work:
the right not to be treated by his employer less favourably than the employer
treats a comparable full-time worker—
(a)as regards the terms of his contract; or
(b)by being subjected to any other detriment by any act, or deliberate
failure to act, of his employer.133
Importantly, the right applies only if the reason for the less favourable
treatment is the fact the worker is a part-time worker and the employer
cannot justify the treatment on objective grounds.134 The worker has the right
to receive, within 21 days, a written statement of reasons for any less
favourable treatment.135
A worker is a “comparable full-time worker” in relation to a part-time worker
if, as at the time of the alleged treatment, both workers are:
• employed by the same employer under the same type of contract; and
• engaged in the same/broadly similar work, having regard, where
relevant, to similarities in qualifications, skills and experience.
The full-time worker must work/be based at the same establishment as the
part-time worker, unless there is no such full-time worker there who satisfies
the above requirements, in which case the comparison will be with one at a
different establishment who does.136 There are exceptions to this need to find
a comparable full-time worker: the treatment of workers becoming parttime/returning to work part-time after absence is compared against their
treatment in their previous full-time role.

19.1 Protection from dismissal
If a part-time employee (as contrasted with a worker; see the Library briefing
on Employment Status137 for an overview of the distinction) is dismissed for
relying on the Regulations against their employer in one of a number of ways
specified in regulation 7(3) (such as bringing proceedings under the
Regulations) the dismissal will be automatically unfair. Similarly, part-time
workers have the right not to be subjected to any detriment for relying on the
Regulations in a way mentioned in regulation 7(3).138

20 Redundancy
Summary
Employees with two or more years’ continuous service with their employer
may be entitled to statutory redundancy pay if dismissed due to redundancy.
Broadly, an employee will be regarded as dismissed by reason of redundancy
if the dismissal is wholly or mainly attributable to:
(a) the fact that his employer has ceased or intends to cease—
1. (i) to carry on the business for the purposes of which the employee was
employed by him, or
2. (ii) to carry on that business in the place where the employee was so
employed, or
(b) the fact that the requirements of that business—
3. (i) for employees to carry out work of a particular kind, or
1. (ii) for employees to carry out work of a particular kind in the place where the
employee was employed by the employer,
have ceased or diminished or are expected to cease or diminish.139
Redundancy pay is the sum of a week’s pay or multiple thereof for each full
year of the employee’s period of continuous employment, reckoned
backwards from the date of dismissal. The relevant multiple for any given
year of employment is determined by the age reached by the employee during
that year:
Multiple of one week’s pay
Age band
(subject to statutory maximum)
1.5 41 and over
1 22 to 40
0.5 Under 22
The maximum length of service for calculating pay is capped at 20 years. A
provides a
week’s pay is subject to the statutory limit in force at the time of the
redundancy pay
dismissal. The limit is set annually by regulations.
Thus, the current maximum available redundancy payment would be payable
to an employee with at least 20 years’ service since they reached the age of
41, which would be 20 x (1.5 x £700) = £21,000.

20.1 Consultation and information requirements
Where an employer proposes to dismiss as redundant 20 or more employees
at one establishment within 90 days or fewer, the employer must consult
appropriate representatives of the employees who may be affected by the
dismissals or connected measures.141
The representatives must be provided with certain information in writing,
including the reasons for the proposals and the numbers and description of
employees whom it is proposed to dismiss as redundant.
If the employer proposes to dismiss 100 or more employees the consultation
must begin at least 45 days before the first dismissal; in other cases the
minimum period is 30 days.142
Protective award
Where an employer has failed to comply with the consultation and
information requirements, employees or their representatives may have
grounds to present a complaint to an employment tribunal.
If the tribunal finds the complaint well-founded it may make a protective
award, payable to employees who have been dismissed as redundant, or
whom it is proposed to dismiss as redundant, and in respect of whose
dismissal the employer has failed to comply with the requirements.
Importantly, the award is payable only in respect of employees who prove
their claim in the tribunal, or whose union does so on their behalf. The
maximum award is 90 days’ gross pay to each of these employees.143

20.2 Notification of Secretary of State
Under Section 193 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation)
Act 1992, an employer proposing to dismiss as redundant 20 or more
employees at one establishment within 90 days or fewer, must also notify the
Secretary of State, in writing, of the proposal. In practice this is done via the
Insolvency Service by completing Form HR1. If the employer proposes to
dismiss 100 or more employees the notification must be given at least 45 days
before the first dismissal; in other cases the minimum period is 30 days.144
An employer who fails to comply with this requirement commits an offence
punishable by an unlimited fine.145

21 References
Summary
An employer that provides a reference must take reasonable care to ensure it
conveys a fair impression.
In some cases, the data protection law entitles persons to obtain copies of
references from recipients, but not from authors.
There is no statutory requirement for an employer to provide a reference in
respect of an ex-employee, but in particular cases there may be a contractual
or other obligation to do so.
If an employer does decide to provide a reference it must take reasonable
care to ensure it conveys a fair impression, bearing in mind that “a number of
discrete statements may be factually accurate, but nevertheless may in the
round give an unfair or potentially unfair impression to the reader”.146
Any allegation of misconduct must have a reasonable basis. If an employer
alludes in a reference to an employee’s misconduct, yet has not carried out
an investigation to substantiate this and does not have reasonable grounds
for believing in the misconduct, it is possible the employer will be liable in
negligence.
These principles apply equally to written and verbal references. The only issue
presented by the fact a reference is conveyed verbally is that it is more
difficult to prove what was said.
The remedies available in a court claim based on negligence would be
monetary damages for financial loss caused by the negligent reference and
potentially an injunction against its future use.

21.1 Access to references
Section 7 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives individuals the right of access
to personal data which is held on them. This entitles a worker to obtain a
copy of their reference from the recipient but not the authoring employer (due
to an exemption in the Act), provided it is reasonable in the circumstances for
the recipient to disclose the information. If the authoring employer marked
the reference as being confidential, the recipient must nonetheless assess
whether it is reasonable to disclose the material.

22 Retirement age
Summary
The Coalition Government abolished the Default Retirement Age of 65 as of 1
October 2011.
Compulsory retirement of employees is now unlawful age discrimination
unless it can be justified as being a proportionate means of achieving a
legitimate aim.
The Employment Equality (Age) Regulations 2006 made compulsory
retirement ages unlawful unless they could be justified. However, that was
subject to a national Default Retirement Age of 65, which allowed compulsory
retirement of workers over that age. The Default Retirement Age was
abolished in October 2011, with the coming into force of the Employment
Equality (Repeal of Retirement Age Provisions) Regulations 2011.149
Under the Equality Act 2010, a policy of compulsory retirement constitutes
direct age discrimination unless it can be justified as being a proportionate
means of achieving a legitimate aim.150
The courts have recognised a number of potentially legitimate aims for
compulsory retirement, including:
• promoting access to employment for younger people;
• the efficient planning of the departure and recruitment of staff;
• sharing out employment opportunities fairly between the generations;
• ensuring a mix of generations of staff, to promote the exchange of
experience and ideas;
• avoiding the need to dismiss employees on the ground that they are no
longer capable of doing the job, which may be humiliating for the
employee concerned; and
• avoiding disputes about the employee’s fitness for work over a certain
age.151
In order to demonstrate that a policy is proportionate an employer must show
that it is “necessary”. A policy will not be necessary if less discriminatory
means of achieving the aim are available. The justification must also be
relevant to the circumstances of the employer in question. It must also be
introduced in the least discriminatory way reasonably possible. For example,
if it is possible to stagger the introduction of a retirement age, so as to
mitigate its negative effects, it is likely that its immediate introduction would
be disproportionate.152

23 Lay-offs and right to guarantee payments for workless days
Summary
Employment contracts may allow employers to put employees on lay-off or
short-time working when there is insufficient work to do.
If an employee is not provided with work by their employer they may be
entitled to a guarantee payment of up to £38 per workless day, for up to five
days in any three-month period.
When employers have insufficient work available for employees, they may
sometimes in exceptional circumstances consider lay-offs – sending
employees home temporarily with no work to do, or short-time working –
reducing employees usual working hours. This is not the same as redundancy
or dismissal. Acas has a guidance page on Lay-offs and short-time working.153
Part III of the Employment Rights Act 1996 entitles qualifying employees to
guarantee payments from their employer if they are not provided with work in
specified circumstances. Section 28 identifies these circumstances:
Where throughout a day during any part of which an employee would normally
be required to work in accordance with his contract of employment the
employee is not provided with work by his employer by reason of—
2. a diminution in the requirements of the employer's business for work of
the kind which the employee is employed to do, or
3. any other occurrence affecting the normal working of the employer's
business in relation to work of the kind which the employee is employed to
do,
4. the employee is entitled to be paid by his employer an amount in respect
of that day.154
Section 29(1) provides that an employee will not be entitled to a guarantee
payment unless they have been continuously employed for at least one month
ending with the day before the workless day.
The right to a guarantee payment does not affect rights to contractual
remuneration. If an employment contract doesn’t contain a clause allowing
the employer to reduce the pay of employees through lay-off or short-time
working, they may still be contractually entitled to full pay even when there is
no work provided. Contractual remuneration for any workless day counts
towards the obligation to pay a guarantee payment in respect of that day.155

23.1 Exclusions from the right to guarantee
payment
Employees are not entitled to guarantee payments if the failure to provide
work is in consequence of industrial action; if the employee has unreasonably
refused alternative work; or if they do not comply with the reasonable
requirements of their employer to ensure that they are available to work.156

23.2 Calculation of guarantee payment
The amount of a guarantee payment payable to an employee in respect of
any day is the sum produced by multiplying the number of normal working
hours on the day by the “guaranteed hourly rate”. The guaranteed hourly rate
is the amount of one week's pay divided by the number of normal working
hours in a week.157 The amount of a guarantee payment payable to an
employee in respect of any day is capped at £38.158 The amount of days for
which this can be claimed is five days in any three-month period on which the
employee would normally work, meaning the total claimable for the three
month period would be £190.159

23.3 Complaints to employment tribunals
An employee may present a complaint to an employment tribunal that their
employer has failed to pay the whole or any part of a guarantee payment to
which the employee is entitled. The complaint must be made within the usual
three-month time limit, beginning with the day on which the employee was
unpaid.160

24 Statement of initial employment particulars
Summary
All workers have a statutory right to a written statement of the basic terms of
their employment. The statement must be provided on or before the worker’s
first day of work.
Section 1 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provides all workers with a right
to a written statement of particulars of employment, with the exception of
certain categories of mariners.161 The statement must contain the basic terms
of the employment as listed in section 1 of the 1996 Act; for example, the job
description, rate of remuneration, hours and place of work, holiday
entitlement and notice periods.162
For those starting work prior to April 2020, this right was only available to
employees (not workers) and only to those with two months service. Any
workers starting work after April 2020 are entitled to this statement with no
minimum service requirements.
The statement must be given to the employee on or before their first day of
work and all terms contained within the statement must comply with other
aspects of employment law (for example, rates of remuneration must be
listed at or above the minimum wage).163
If there is a change in any of the terms detailed in the statement, the
employer must give the employee a written statement containing details of
the change no later than one month after the change.164

24.1 Remedies
If the employer fails to provide or provides inadequate particulars the
employee may require a reference to be made to an employment tribunal,
which will determine what particulars ought to have been included or referred
to.165
If an employer breaches the requirement to provide a statement of
particulars or changes, an employment tribunal may compensate the
employee for this, but only in tribunal proceedings relating to matters
specified in Schedule 5 to the Employment Relations Act 2002 (for example,
unfair dismissal or discrimination claims). Thus, there is no freestanding right
to claim compensation for failure to provide particulars.
In such a claim, if the tribunal finds a breach of the right to a statement of
particulars or changes, it must make an award (even if no award is otherwise
made in the main claim) of two weeks’ pay, but can increase this to four
weeks’ pay. If the tribunal makes an award in the main claim it must increase
the value of that award by two weeks’ pay, but can increase this to four
weeks’ pay. A week’s pay for these purposes is subject to the statutory limit
(£700 as of April 2024).166

25 Statutory Sick Pay
Summary
A qualifying employee is entitled to Statutory Sick Pay (SSP) if they have been
ill for four or more consecutive days, provided they notify their employer
within a prescribed deadline.
For SSP purposes, agency workers may fall within the definition of
“employee”.
SSP is capped at 28 weeks at a time, paid at a weekly rate of £116.75.
Since 6 April 2014 employers have been unable to recover from the State
amounts paid in SSP.
The current SSP rate as of April 2024 is £116.75 per week. SSP is available to
qualifying employees that have been ill for four or more consecutive days
(including non-working days) and earn at least £123 a week on average (pretax).168 The employee cannot claim for the first three days of illness.
SSP is essentially a form of social security employers are required to pay. This
means SSP uses a different definition of “employee” from that used in the
Employment Rights Act 1996.169 An important effect of this is that it entitles
some agency workers to SSP.
The employee’s period of entitlement to SSP is capped at 28 weeks’ SSP within
a single period of incapacity for work. Periods of incapacity for work of four or
more consecutive days, separated by not more than eight weeks, are linked
for the purposes of applying the 28-week cap.170 The cap is financial and
applies once the amount of SSP paid reaches an amount equal to 28 times the
weekly rate.
An employer can withhold payment of SSP if not notified of any day of
incapacity for work within either the deadline it prescribes or seven days if no
deadline is prescribed.

25.1 Employers’ right to recover SSP
Since 6 April 2014 employers have been unable to recover amounts paid in
SSP.171 Prior to that the Statutory Sick Pay Percentage Threshold Order 1995
entitled an employer to recover any amounts paid in SSP exceeding 13% of
their liability to pay National Insurance in the same income tax month. The
1995 Order replaced from 6 April 1995 small employers’ entitlement to 100%
reimbursement of SSP.

26 Suspension
Summary
There is no statutory right not to be unfairly suspended, although suspension
without reasonable and proper cause might amount to a breach of one’s
employment contract.
There are no rigid rules prescribing when an employer may or may not
suspend an employee. The matter is regulated by the contract of
employment, which may set out a suspension procedure. The courts have in a
number of cases held that an employer’s express contractual right to suspend
an employee should only be exercised on reasonable grounds.172
There is also implied into contracts of employment a term that the parties
must not act in a manner likely to destroy or seriously damage their
relationship of mutual trust and confidence. Where “there is no reasonable
and proper cause for the employer's action, suspension may amount to a
breach of the implied term of trust and confidence”.173 This is a fundamental
term of the contract, which means that if one party breaches it the other may
accept that breach as ending the contract.
In a 2012 judgment of the Court of Appeal, Lord Justice Elias said that
suspension:
should not be a knee-jerk reaction, and it will be a breach of the duty of trust
and confidence towards the employee if it is. I appreciate that suspension is
often said to be in the employee's best interests; but many employees would
question that, and in my view they would often be right to do so. They will
frequently feel belittled and demoralised by the total exclusion from work and
the enforced removal from their work colleagues, many of whom will be
friends. This can be psychologically very damaging. Even if they are
subsequently cleared of the charges, the suspicions are likely to linger, not
least I suspect because the suspension appears to add credence to them.174
If the suspension is in breach of the term of trust and confidence, the
employee may accept the breach by resigning, and subsequently sue for
constructive dismissal. Depending on the circumstances, the employee may
be able to obtain an injunction to prevent or end the suspension.175

27 Transfer of undertakings & protection of employment
Summary
In certain cases, employees are protected from being dismissed, or from
having their contracts amended, where there is a change of ownership of the
business for which they work, or there is a change to their work brought about
by outsourcing, reassignment between contractors or insourcing activities
back in-house.
The Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 2006
(generally referred to as ‘TUPE’) as amended by the Collective Redundancies
and Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) (Amendment)
Regulations 2014 preserve employees’ terms and conditions and protect them
from dismissal where a “relevant transfer” occurs.
The 2006 Regulations (which replace earlier variously amended regulations)
implemented the EU Acquired Rights Directive, now consolidated in Directive
2001/23/EC, although go further than the Directive in their application to
“service provision changes” (see below). Since the UK’s departure from the
EU, these Regulations now form part of assimilated law.

27.1 Relevant transfers
The Regulations apply to “relevant transfers”, defined in regulation 3. A
relevant transfer occurs when:
• an undertaking or business or part of an undertaking or business is
transferred from one person to another; or
• there is a service provision change.178
Business transfers involve the transfer of an “economic entity” (an organised
grouping of persons/assets whose object is pursuit of an economic activity)
which retains its identity following the transfer. Whether or not the
undertaking “retains its identity” is a question of fact involving consideration
of the transferred assets and workforce and whether business activities
remain the same or similar after the transfer. Transfers can include buyouts
or mergers of businesses or intra-group transfers.
Service provision changes are changes to activity brought about by
outsourcing, reassignment between contractors or insourcing activities back
in-house. Broadly, in order to constitute a service provision change the
activities transferred must be fundamentally the same as those carried out by
the person who has ceased to carry them out.
Additionally, there must have been, immediately before the change, an
“organised grouping of employees” whose principal purpose was to carry out
the activities on the client’s behalf (for example, outsourcing responsibility for
cleaning an office, affecting a team of office cleaners). Regulation 3(1)(b) and
3(3) set out some additional conditions.179
The Acas guidance mentioned above gives the following example of a service
provision change covered by the regulations:
An organisation called DeskCo has contracted out the reception and security
of their office to SecureLimited. When the contract ends, they retender the
contract to Safeunit. DeskCo is the client as they are receiving the services. The
reception and security staff are part of an organised grouping of employees as
they provide services to meet DeskCo's needs. They’ll transfer to Safeunit under
TUPE. TUPE applies because the client DeskCo remains the same.180

27.2 Effect of the transfer
The transferor’s employees whose employment would otherwise be
terminated by the transfer will, upon the transfer, become employees of the
transferee, and enjoy the same terms and conditions as those that had
operated between them and the transferor. This will only apply to persons
employed immediately before the transfer and assigned to the “organised
grouping of resources or employees that is subject to a relevant transfer”.181
The transferee also inherits civil rights and liabilities associated with the
contract. Certain collective agreements negotiated by transferors with trade
unions also transfer.
One notable exception to the above is that pension rights relating to old-age,
invalidity or survivors, do not transfer (see the Library’s briefing on TUPE and
Pensions).182

27.3 Dismissal and changes to terms
Where, before or after the transfer, any employee is dismissed, and the sole
or principal reason for the dismissal is the transfer, the dismissal is
automatically unfair.183 The employee would be able to issue a claim for unfair
dismissal, subject to the normal qualifying period (currently, two years’
continuous employment). However, this protection does not apply:
where the sole or principal reason for the dismissal is an economic, technical
or organisational reason entailing changes in the workforce of either the
transferor or the transferee before or after a relevant transfer.184
While there is no statutory definition of what constitutes an economic,
technical or organisational (ETO) reason, the aforementioned government
guidance states the term is likely to include:
(a) a reason relating to the profitability or market performance of the new
employer’s business (ie. an economic reason);
(b) a reason relating to the nature of the equipment or production processes
which the new employer operates (ie. a technical reason); or
(c) a reason relating to the management or organisational structure of the
new employer’s business (ie. an organisational reason).185
27.4 Variation of contract
As with dismissals, any purported change to an employee’s contract of
employment will be void if the sole or principal reason for the variation is the
transfer, unless:
• the reason for the variation is an ETO reason (see above); or
• the terms of that contract permit the employer to make such a
variation.186

28 Unfair dismissal
Summary
Persons classed as “employees” have the right not to be unfairly dismissed,
provided (in most cases) they have two years’ continuous employment with
their employer.
Certain “automatically unfair” reasons for dismissal apply even with no
qualifying period.
Part 10 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provides employees with the right
not to be unfairly dismissed. In most cases the employee must have two
years’ continuous service with their employer to qualify to bring a claim.
The test for whether a dismissal is fair is set out in section 98 of the Act and a
considerable body of case law. Broadly, it is for the employer to show that the
dismissal was for a potentially fair reason (capability or qualifications,
conduct, redundancy, statutory restriction of employment or some other
substantial reason justifying dismissal). Once the employer has shown that
(which it often easily does), the fairness of the dismissal depends on whether,
in the circumstances, the employer had acted reasonably in treating the
reason as sufficient for dismissing the employee, a question determined “in
accordance with equity and the substantial merits of the case”.187 In assessing
this, tribunals will look to whether the employer’s conduct in dismissing the
employee fell within the range of reasonable responses to the reason for
dismissal. The tribunal will also assess whether the employer followed a fair
procedure, often by reference to the ACAS Code of Practice on Disciplinary
and Grievance Procedures.188
No qualifying period applies in respect of a range of ‘automatically unfair’
reasons for dismissal.189 There are many types of dismissal deemed
automatically unfair. For example, dismissal for union membership, for
asserting statutory rights or for family-leave related reasons. Many, although
not all, of these reasons are set out in Part 10 of the Employment Rights Act
1996 and some are discussed earlier in this paper.

Compensation
Compensation for unfair dismissal is normally considered under two heads: a
basic award and a compensatory award.
Basic award
The basic award is calculated in broadly the same way as redundancy pay
(see above). For each year of the employee’s period of continuous
employment, reckoned backwards from and ending on the effective date of
termination, they are paid an amount based on the age reached during that
year:
Multiple of one week’s pay
Age band
(subject to statutory maximum)
1.5 41 and over
1 22 to 40
0.5 Under 22
The relevant statutory maximum amount of a week’s pay for calculating the
basic award is that which is in force at the time of the dismissal. It is set
annually by regulations. The most recently prescribed limits are:
Date Maximum amount of one week’s pay
6 April 2024 – 5 April 2025 £ 700
6 April 2023 – 5 April 2024 £ 643
6 April 2022 – 5 April 2023 £ 571
The calculation of the compensatory award is complex and beyond the scope
of this note. Broadly, it is an amount considered just and equitable awarded
by a tribunal to reflect the employee’s loss, including expenses incurred in
consequence of the dismissal and loss of earnings.190 The award is subject to
a statutory cap. For dismissals since 29 July 2013 the maximum award is
whichever is the lower of:
1. the statutory cap; or
2. 52 weeks’ actual gross pay at the time of the dismissal.
The most recently prescribed limits are:
Date Cap on award
6 April 2024 – 5 April 2025 £ 115,115
6 April 2023 – 5 April 2024 £ 105,707
6 April 2022 – 5 April 2023 £ 93,878

29 Variation of contract
Summary
As a general principle of contract law, one party to a contract cannot
unilaterally change its terms. As such, by and large, employers cannot
change workers contracts without first obtaining their agreement.
One common way of avoiding this is to include in the contract from the outset
a variation clause, entitling the employer to make changes to it without
having to agree them each time.
A more controversial approach is to dismiss employees and then offer them
reemployment on a new contract – for more information about this issue see
the Library briefing on Fire and rehire practices.
Employment will generally involve the employer at some point or another
seeking to change the terms and conditions under which employees work. If
the employer and employee mutually consent to varying the terms of the
employment contract (such as the employee agreeing to the employer’s offer
of a pay rise) the new terms become binding, and some or all the old terms
cease to have effect going forward. Another common means via which terms
are varied is through collective bargaining, where the original contract
provides for the incorporation of terms collectively agreed from time to time.
In some cases, however, employers will seek to implement changes to which
ACAS has produced
employees do not consent. There are several ways an employer can do this,
guidance for which puts it at risk of a legal claim to a greater or lesser degree. Some
employers on this common approaches are for the employer to:
area.191
• Seek agreement, but failing that impose changes and see what happens.
This unilateral action could provide the basis for a breach of contract
claim. If the changes were to important terms their variation might
constitute a ‘repudiatory breach’ of the employment contract (a breach
of terms so core to the agreement between the parties that its effect is to
entitle one party to accept that breach as having ended the contract)
enabling a qualifying employee to resign and claim constructive unfair
dismissal (see above).
• Terminate the existing contract and offer to reemploy the employee on a
new contract (often termed ‘fire-and-rehire’). Terminating a contract will
constitute a dismissal and create the possibility of an unfair dismissal
claim. This will be so even if the employee accepts the offer of
employment on the new terms. In considering such a claim an
employment tribunal would, broadly, assess whether the employer
thought that it had a good business reason for the dismissal, and
whether termination of the employee’s contract was a reasonable
response to that reason, factoring in the employee’s objections to the
change and the process followed by the employer in implementing it.
• Rely on a clause that entitles the employer to make changes to the
contract. One common example is a mobility clause, entitling the
employer to require attendance at a different place or work. The courts
take a restrictive approach to such clauses and resolve any ambiguity as
to their effect against parties relying on them.
The legal consequences of an attempted variation of contract are highly
context-specific. An employee wanting to understand their prospects of
resisting a change, or the risks of resigning in response to a unilateral
variation, should seek independent legal advice, sources of which are set out
in the Library briefing on Legal advice and help in employment matters.192

30 Whistleblowing
Summary
Workers that disclose information of certain kinds of malpractice at work may
be protected from being subjected to detriment by their employers, provided
the disclosure is made in a prescribed manner. The relevant law is explained
in the Library’s briefing paper on whistleblowing, which provides a full
overview of whistleblowing law.
The Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (PIDA) amended the Employment
Rights Act 1996 to provide protection for workers that disclose information
about malpractice at their workplace, or former workplace, provided certain
conditions are met.
PIDA protects workers who make “protected disclosures” from being
subjected to detriment by their employers.193 It applies to most workers, with
limited exceptions (it does not apply to employment in the Security Service,
the Secret Intelligence Service or the Government Communications
Headquarters).194
Section 43A of the Employment Rights Act 1996 defines protected disclosure
as:
a qualifying disclosure (as defined by section 43B) which is made by a worker
in accordance with any of sections 43C to 43H
Thus, a protected disclosure is:
• a disclosure of a certain kind of information (a “qualifying disclosure”);
• that is disclosed by a worker in a certain way.
Section 43B defines a “qualifying disclosure” as any disclosure of information
(as distinct from allegation or opinion) which, in the reasonable belief of the
worker making the disclosure, is made in the public interest and tends to
show any of the following:
(a) that a criminal offence has been committed, is being committed or is likely
to be committed,
(b) that a person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any legal
obligation to which he is subject,
(c) that a miscarriage of justice has occurred, is occurring or is likely to occur,
(d) that the health or safety of any individual has been, is being or is likely to
be endangered,
(e) that the environment has been, is being or is likely to be damaged, or
(f) that information tending to show any matter falling within any one of the
preceding paragraphs has been, is being or is likely to be deliberately
concealed.195
In order to satisfy the definition of protected disclosure, the qualifying
disclosure must be made in accordance with any of the sections 43C to 43H,
which outline the following permitted methods of disclosure:
• disclosure to the worker’s employer;
• disclosure to another responsible person, if the worker reasonably
believes the information relates to that person’s conduct or a matter for
which they are responsible (e.g. an agency worker might raise a concern
with the organisation hiring him);
• disclosure made in the course of obtaining legal advice;
• disclosure to a Minister of the Crown if the worker’s employer is
appointed by enactment (this protects workers in government appointed
bodies who complain to the sponsoring department; e.g. a worker in an
NHS Trust might disclose to the Department of Health);
• disclosure to prescribed persons (see below section 30.1);
• disclosure that meets the conditions of section 43G (see below section
30.2);
• disclosure of an exceptionally serious failure (see below section 30.3).196

30.1 Disclosure to prescribed persons
The prescribed persons are set out in The Public Interest Disclosure
(Prescribed Persons) Order 1999 as amended. They are bodies responsible for
the regulation of various activities, such as the Audit Commission; the Civil
Aviation Authority; Director General of Fair Trading; the Environment Agency,
and so on. In order for the disclosure to be protected, the worker must
reasonably believe that the information disclosed is substantially true and
relates to a matter for which the prescribed person is responsible (as set out
in a table in the Schedule to the Order). The Department for Business and
Trade maintains an up to date list of prescribed people and bodies.197
Members of Parliament are prescribed persons, disclosure to whom may be
protected in relation to any matter described in the Schedule (that is to say,
any matter for which one of the other prescribed persons is responsible).198

30.2 Disclosure to non-prescribed persons
Section 43G of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provides conditions for
“disclosure in other cases”. It protects disclosure to persons other than those
detailed above, provided certain criteria are met. It could be used, for
example, to protect disclosure to the press. To benefit from this protection
one of the following must apply:
• the worker reasonably believes they will be subjected to detriment if they
disclose to their employer;
• where there is no relevant prescribed person, the worker reasonably
believes that evidence will be concealed or destroyed if they disclose to
their employer; or
• the worker has already disclosed substantially the same information to
either their employer or a prescribed person.
If one of the above applies, then disclosure by the worker may be eligible for
protection under the section, provided all the following conditions are met:
• they reasonably believe that the information disclosed, and any
allegation contained in it, are substantially true;
• they do not make the disclosure for purposes of personal gain;
• in all the circumstances of the case, it is reasonable for them to make the
disclosure.

30.3 Disclosure of exceptionally serious failures
Section 43H of the Employment Rights Act 1996 protects disclosures of
“exceptionally serious” failures, even to non-prescribed persons. It is similar
to section 43G above in having the same three final conditions, although there
is no requirement for the worker to have first contemplated or attempted
disclosing the failure to their employer or a prescribed person. While there is
no explicit restriction on who information can be disclosed to under this
section, “the identity of the person to whom the disclosure is made” is an
important factor in whether the disclosure meets the test of being
“reasonable”.199

30.4 Remedies
If a worker is subjected to detriment by their employer for having made a
protected disclosure that worker may enforce their rights by presenting a
complaint to an employment tribunal.200 The claim must be brought within
three months of the act (or failure to act) complained of.201 Where an
employee is dismissed for having made a protected disclosure, the employee
will be regarded as having been automatically unfairly dismissed.202 There is
no upper limit on the amount of financial compensation obtainable in
whistleblowing-based unfair dismissal claims.203

30.6 Extension to office holders
In 2019, the Supreme Court held in Gilham v Ministry of Justice that
whistleblowing protections could be extended to judicial office holders, even
though they are not normally considered to have the status of workers. The
Supreme Court found that denying these protections to a district judge
infringed her rights to non-discrimination in the enjoyment of the right to
freedom of expression under articles 14 and 10 of the European Convention on
Human Rights. As a result, judicial office holders are also eligible for
protection under Part IVA of the Employment Rights Act 1996.205

31 Working time
Summary
Subject to various qualifications discussed below, the Working Time
Regulations 1998:
limit average working time to 48 hours per week and eight hours per night for
night workers;
entitle workers to:
• a daily rest period of eleven hours in each 24-hour period;
• a weekly rest period of 24 hours in each seven-day period;
• a 20-minute rest break once daily working time exceeds six hours; and
• 5.6 weeks’ annual leave (this is dealt with above, under ‘Holiday’)
The Working Time Regulations 1998, as amended, implemented EU law on
working time, originating with Directive 93/104/EC and consolidated in
Directive 2003/88/EC (the ‘Working Time Directive’). The Regulations set
limits on weekly working time and night work, and provide rights to rest
periods and breaks. Since the UK’s departure from the European Union and
the passage of the Retained EU Law (Revocation and Reform) Act 2023, these
Regulations form part of assimilated law.

31.1 Scope of the Regulations
“Working time” is defined under the Regulations as including any period
during which the worker is working, at the employer’s disposal and carrying
out their activity or duties, or undertaking certain types of work-related
training. Employment contracts or collective/workforce agreements may
specify additional types of working time for the purposes of the
Regulations.206
The Regulations apply to workers, including agency workers, although there
are several exceptions. The Regulations either wholly or mainly do not apply
to:
• merchant seafarers;
• sea-fishermen;
• work on vessels operating on inland waterways;
• mobile staff in civil aviation; and
• mobile staff in road transport.
Working time in these sectors is addressed by separate legislation, 207 and
discussed in the Library briefing paper Working Time Directive: Excluded
Sectors.208 Additionally, the provisions setting limits on working time and
entitling rest do not apply to “unmeasured working time”, which is time that
“is not measured or predetermined or can be determined by the worker
himself” (such as managers who control their own work).
The Regulations do not apply:
where characteristics peculiar to certain specific services such as the armed
forces or the police, or to certain specific activities in the civil protection
services, inevitably conflict with the provisions of these Regulations209
The exception applies to ensure the:
proper operation of services essential for the protection of public health, safety
and order in cases the gravity and scale of which are exceptional and a
characteristic of which is the fact that, by their nature, they do not lend
themselves to planning as regards the working time of teams of emergency
workers.210
Thus, it does not apply to the routine operation of emergency services.

31.2 Working time limits
Maximum weekly working time
Regulation 4 provides that, subject to a worker agreeing to opt out, “working
time, including overtime … shall not exceed an average of 48 hours”. An
employer must take reasonable steps to ensure this limit is complied with.
The limit does not apply where an employer has obtained a worker’s
agreement in writing to “opt-out” of it. This may relate to a specific period or
apply indefinitely. Unless the agreement provides otherwise, it is terminable
by the worker if they give at least seven days’ written notice (any otherwise
agreed notice period cannot exceed three months).211 Workers cannot be
subjected to detriment or dismissal for refusing to enter into or continue such
an opt-out – any such dismissal is automatically unfair.
Working time is averaged over a period of 17 weeks, although this is extended
to 26 weeks in certain cases, such as offshore work; security and surveillance
activities; where there is a need for continuity of service or production (such
as hospital care); where there is a foreseeable surge of activity (such as in
agriculture); or where activities are affected by unexpected circumstances.212
A collective or workforce agreement may in certain cases extend this to 52
weeks.213
Length of night work
A night worker's normal hours of work must not exceed an average of eight
hours during each 24 hours, averaged across a 17-week period.215 The
employer must take reasonable steps to ensure this limit is complied with.
“Night time” for these purposes is defined by the employment contract or
collective/workforce agreement (but must include the period between
midnight and 5 a.m.). If no period is specified, the default is the period
between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. A “night worker” is one who normally works at
least three hours during night time.216

31.3 Rest
Daily rest period
Workers are entitled to a daily rest period of eleven consecutive hours in
each 24-hour period. In the case of a shift worker, the requirement does not
apply when they are changing shift and cannot take a daily rest period
between the end of one shift and the start of the next one, although
compensatory rest should be provided.217
Weekly rest period
A worker is entitled to an uninterrupted rest period of not less than 24 hours
in each seven-day period, although the employer may change this to either:
• two uninterrupted rest periods each of not less than 24 hours in each 14day period; or
• one uninterrupted rest period of not less than 48 hours in each 14-day
period.218
As with daily rest, the requirement is disapplied in certain cases for shift
workers.
Rest breaks
Where a worker’s working time exceeds six hours, they are entitled to a 20minute break.219 The entitlement does not multiply; a worker working 12 hours
is entitled to one 20-minute break. The length of the break may be modified or
excluded by a collective or workforce agreement. In order to count as a rest
break, it must be an uninterrupted break which the worker knows is a break
and can use as they please.220