PAYE and payroll for
employers
1. Introduction to PAYE
As an employer, you normally have to operate PAYE as part of your payroll.
PAYE is HM Revenue and Customs’ (HMRC) system to collect Income Tax
and National Insurance from employment.
When you must register
You must register for PAYE if any of the following applies to an employee in
the current tax year (since 6 April):
they’re paid £96 or more a week
they get expenses and company benefits
they’re getting a pension
they’ve had another job
they’ve received Jobseeker’s Allowance, Employment and Support
Allowance or Incapacity Benefit
If you do not need to register, you’ll still need to keep payroll records .
Payments and deductions
When paying your employees through payroll you also need to make
deductions for PAYE.

Payments to your employees
Payments to your employees  include their salary
or wages, as well as things like any tips or bonuses, or statutory sick or
maternity pay.
Deductions from their pay
From these payments, you’ll need to deduct tax and National Insurance
 for most employees. Other deductions you may
need to make include student loan repayments or pension contributions.
Reporting to and paying HMRC
Reporting pay and deductions
If you run payroll yourself, you’ll need to report your employees’ payments
and deductions  to HMRC on or before each
payday.
Your payroll software will work out how much tax and National Insurance
you owe, including an employer’s National Insurance contribution on each
employee’s earnings above £96 a week.
You’ll need to send another report to claim any reduction  on what you owe HMRC, for example for
statutory pay.
Paying HMRC
You’ll be able to view what you owe HMRC, based on your reports. You then
have to pay HMRC , usually every month.
If you’re a small employer that expects to pay less than £1,500 a month,
you can arrange to pay quarterly - contact HMRC’s payment enquiry
helpline .
Other things to report
As part of your regular reports, you should tell HMRC:

when a new employee joins 
if an employee’s circumstances change , for example they reach State Pension age or become a director
You have to run annual reports  at the end of the tax
year - including telling HMRC about any expenses or benefits.
Choose how to run payroll
If you have to operate PAYE, you can choose how to run your payroll

2. Choose how to run payroll
You can operate PAYE  by either:
paying a payroll provider to do it for you
doing it yourself using payroll software
Paying a payroll provider
If you decide to pay a payroll provider (for example, a bureau or accountant)
to run your payroll, you’ll need to consider how much support you’ll need.
You’re responsible for collecting and keeping records  of your employee’s details. Your payroll provider
will need these to run payroll for you.
Some payroll providers can offer you more support if you need it, for
example keeping employee records, providing payslips and making
payments to HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC).
As an employer, you’re legally responsible for completing all PAYE tasks
- even if you pay someone else to do them.
Running payroll yourself
You need to complete certain tasks to set up payroll  and pay your employees for the first time. This
includes registering as an employer with HMRC and telling them about your
employees.
Exemptions to online reporting

You may be exempt from reporting payroll online if:
you’re prevented from using a computer on religious grounds
you’re getting care or support services for yourself or a member of your
family
you’re unable to send reports electronically because you’re disabled,
elderly or cannot access the internet

3. Setting up payroll
If you decide to run payroll yourself, you need to complete certain tasks to
pay your employees for the first time. You can choose when and how often
to pay your employees.
1 Register as an employer  with HM Revenue and
Customs (HMRC) and get a login for PAYE Online .
2 Choose payroll software  to record employee’s details,
calculate pay and deductions, and report to HMRC.
3 Collect and keep records .
4 Tell HMRC about your employees .
5 Record pay, make deductions and report to HMRC  on
or before the first payday.
6 Pay HMRC  the tax and National Insurance
you owe.
You’ll also need to complete certain annual reports and tasks  to prepare for the next tax year, which starts on 6 April.
4. Keeping records
You must collect and keep records of:

what you pay your employees  and the
deductions you make 
reports you make  to HM Revenue and
Customs (HMRC)
payments you make to HMRC 
employee leave and sickness absences
tax code notices 
taxable expenses or benefits 
Payroll Giving Scheme  documents, including the agency
contract and employee authorisation forms
Your records must show you’ve reported accurately, and you need to keep
them for 3 years from the end of the tax year they relate to. HMRC may
check your records  to make sure you’re paying the
right amount of tax.
There are different rules for keeping records to prove you have paid the
correct minimum wage .
! If you do not keep full records, HMRC may estimate what you
have to pay and charge you a penalty of up to £3,000.
If your records are lost, stolen or destroyed
