Section 2: Introduction to employment
What is employment status?
Employment status is relevant in all working relationships, it defines the
minimum rights and responsibilities for individuals and employers or
engagers in the workplace, covering areas such as pay, leave and working
conditions. These protections have been set out or
developed in law to ensure individuals are protected from unfair practices.
Employment status is not just a matter of what a contract (whether oral or
in writing) states; it is determined by the reality of the working relationship
between employer and individual, taking account of all the circumstances
including the purpose of employment legislation. The written contract is just
one part of that assessment.
Although there are countless different working relationships that individuals
and businesses can agree to, the law reduces these into 1 of 3 main types
of status for employment rights. However, there are special provisions for
other groups of workers such as agency workers, see section 4 for further
details. The 3 main types of employment status are:
an employee who has the most rights and responsibilities
a worker – sometimes referred to as ‘limb (b) workers’ who have fewer
rights and obligations. The aim of the limb (b) worker status is to extend
the coverage of certain employment rights to a wider group of individuals
than just employees, protecting a larger number of individuals who are in
dependent working relationships but are not employees.
a self-employed person who has the least protection but also tends to
have fewer personal obligations and have significant flexibility in their
work and/or delivers a service to a customer or client as part of a
business or professional undertaking

Employees
This status reflects greater certainty over where, when and how work is
carried out. The individual would likely work regularly and be paid for
completing those hours of work. Employees tend to be individuals in
permanent full-time or part-time work but can also, in some circumstances,
include individuals on casual contracts (such as fixed term and/or zero
hours (see Section 6)). Employees are generally entitled to the full suite of
employment rights – the relevant statutory rights are explained in the
Employment rights section, subject to qualifying periods. However, there is
also discretion for employers to provide additional contractual benefits to
employees. For example, an employer could provide paternity leave of 2
months which is well above the statutory entitlement of 2 weeks paternity
leave.
Employees also benefit from and are bound by other common law rights
and obligations. Both statutory and common law rights and obligations
(body of law formed by the decisions from Courts and tribunals) are implied
into a contract of employment and cannot be overridden by the terms of the
employment contract. For example, notice periods, even if contractually
agreed, are subject to a statutory minimum.
Compared to other employment statuses, there are more obligations
between an employer and an employee. For example, employers have the
right to be informed by a certain point if one of their employees is intending
to take maternity/paternity/adoption leave or return to their job after the
leave has been taken. While employers in most cases have the obligation to
provide work and remunerate accordingly.

Workers (limb (b) workers)
Individuals in this category are less likely to be working in permanent, fulltime employment with a single employing organisation. They are more likely
to have more casual and flexible working relationships often involving
multiple and sometimes rival employers. Limb (b) workers are entitled to
core statutory employment rights but have increased freedom in how much,
where and when they work. All limb (b) worker rights are rights from day 1,
where limb (b) workers do not need continuous service or qualifying periods
to accrue their rights reflecting their more flexible relationship to their
employer(s). However, as with the employee status, there is also discretion
for employers to provide additional contractual statutory benefits beyond the
legal minimum to limb (b) workers, for example, paying above the National
Minimum Wage or National Living Wage.
The limb (b) worker and employer(s) relationship should expect to have
more flexibility over how, where and when work is done compared to the
employee status but limb (b) workers are generally required to do the work
themselves and only have a limited right to send someone else. This status
still requires employers to provide individuals with a core set of employment
protections. Many individuals enjoy the increased freedom that this status
can provide in their work including balancing their work with other
commitments whilst still benefiting from core protections.

Self-employed
Self-employed individuals should expect to have the most flexibility and
control over how, if and when they work and are generally able to send
someone else to do the work without significant restrictions. It is a category
for those who run and manage their own business or work, often best
understood as individuals in business for themselves. Generally, selfemployed individuals have no statutory employment rights but are entitled to
some health and safety protections/obligations as well as anti-discrimination
rights when they are contracted by a customer or client.
For an employer or engager, it is important to understand that the status of
an individual they employ or engage is not simply a matter of choice. The
status is determined by the real nature of the working relationship, not what
an employer or engager chooses to call it. Therefore, simply calling
someone ‘self-employed’, or putting that term in writing in a contract, does
not necessarily mean that the individual will legally be classed as selfemployed. If the relationship in reality is that of a limb (b) worker or
employee, then the individual is entitled to limb (b) worker or employee
rights regardless of what it says in their contract. Deliberate
misclassification of employment status should not be used to deny
employees or workers employment rights and protections they are entitled
to.

Employment rights
Employment rights and protections are set out by law and employers must
not avoid them. Employment rights and protections vary between the
different statuses, and some have qualifying periods.
There are some statutory rights which an employee gets after working
continuously for a period of time – this is called continuity of service.
Establishing sufficient continuity of service is essential to access those
employee rights that have a qualifying period such as the right not to be
unfairly dismissed and the right to a statutory redundancy payment. Even if
a person does not work every week, a Court can sometimes find that their
relationship with their employer continues so that there is an umbrella
contract or over-arching contract covering a particular period of time which
means there is continuity of service. 

Workplace pension scheme
An employer must automatically enrol employees and limb (b) workers into
a workplace pension scheme and make contributions to their pension if all
of the following apply: you are aged between 22 and State Pension age,
you earn at least £10,000 per year for that employer and you usually
(‘ordinarily’) work in the UK.
Right to join a trade union and to participate in trade union activities
It is automatically unfair for an employer to dismiss an employee on the
grounds of trade union membership or for participating in union activities at
an appropriate time. It is also against the law to refuse to recruit a person as
a limb (b) worker or employee because the person is a member of a trade
union. Employers must not subject a limb (b) worker or employee to
detriment for the purposes of preventing, deterring or penalising trade union
membership or participation in union activities at an appropriate time.
All employees (and in limited cases some limb (b) workers) are eligible for
Statutory Maternity Pay, Shared Parental Pay, Paternity Pay, Adoption Pay,
Parental Bereavement Pay and Statutory Sick Pay as long as they also
meet other qualifying criteria and earn on average above the Lower
Earnings Limit (£123 a week before tax).
Whether an individual can get these rights is determined by reference to
criteria set out under the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act
1992 and by reference to other relevant legislation. Whether a potential
employer is an employer for Statutory Maternity Pay, Shared Parental Pay,
Paternity Pay, Adoption Pay, Parental Bereavement Pay or Statutory Sick
Pay purposes is linked to their obligation to pay secondary Class 1 National
Insurance Contributions, rather than the employment rights framework.

Other employment frameworks and entitlements
The employment status framework for tax and National Insurance is
separate to the employment rights framework and comprises 2 categories:
employee and self-employed. Whether an individual is classed as an
employee or self-employed for tax purposes affects the tax and National
Insurance they pay and how they pay them, and the individual’s entitlement
to some social security benefits. Employment status for tax is a matter of
fact (as it is for employment rights and protections) and is not a choice for
the individual or their engager. This means that the facts and circumstances
of the engagement determine what employment status an individual has,
rather than a decision by themselves or their engager to assign them a
specific employment status, or belief that they have a particular status. Tax and National Insurance
legislation also requires that some engagements are treated as employment
for tax purposes where there is not a contract of employment between the
individual and the recipient of their services. This includes office holders,
such as company directors, and, where certain conditions are met, workers
supplied by agencies or working through Personal Service Companies. 
The employment status framework for Universal Credit is also separate to
the employment rights framework and generally follows the definitions for
tax and National Insurance, comprising 2 categories: employee and selfemployed. The main difference between Universal Credit and the treatment
of tax and National Insurance is that where a claimant operates through a
company in a position comparable to a sole trader or, one of a small number
of partners (i.e. they are the sole owner of the company or one of a small
number of shareholders) they are treated as self-employed in the same way
as someone trading without a company structure. 
Maternity Allowance is a benefit intended for those who cannot get Statutory
Maternity Pay, such as the low paid and the self-employed. Entitlement to
Maternity Allowance is dependent on satisfying qualifying conditions. For
self-employed women this involves being registered as self-employed with
HMRC according to their rules for at least 26 weeks in the 66 weeks
immediately preceding the expected week of birth. The amount of Maternity
Allowance received by self-employed women is dependent upon the
number of class 2 National Insurance contributions paid for those same 66
weeks. Self-employed women who have paid 13 weeks of Class 2 National
Insurance contributions in the 66-week period are treated as having
sufficient earnings to entitle them to the standard rate. 

Section 3: Key factors in determining
employment status
Employment status will be mainly governed by the reality of the relationship
between the individual and the organisation. The absence of a written
contract or the fact that a contract between the 2 may specify a particular
status is not conclusive if that does not correspond to what happens in
reality.
The Employment Rights Act 1996 sets out most of the employment rights
and protections in Great Britain. In the Employment Rights Act 1996,
Section 230, both
employee and worker are defined in the legislation. An employee also
comes under part (a) of the definition of worker and is sometimes referred to
as ‘limb (a)’, as they work under a contract of employment. Contract of
employment means a contract of service or apprenticeship, whether
express or implied, and (if it is express) whether oral or in writing. Part (b) of
the worker definition, ‘a limb (b) worker’ covers a person who works under
any other contract whereby the individual undertakes the work or performs
services personally and the other party to the contract is not a client or
customer of any profession or business carried on by the individual.

Based on the legislation and case law, it is easiest to consider for the
purposes of employment law that there are 3 employment statuses in Great
Britain:
1. Employee: where it can be determined that a contract of employment
exists. Employees are entitled to all employment rights subject, where
appropriate, to qualifying periods and sometimes other qualifying criteria.
2. Limb (b) worker: where it can be determined that any other contract by
which the individual performs work or services personally for someone else
(unless the individual is working on a genuinely self-employed basis for a
client or customer) exists. Limb (b) workers are entitled to core day 1
statutory employment rights.
3. Self-employed – not defined in the legislation but best understood as
people who carry on a profession or business on their own account and
enter into contracts with clients or customers to provide work or services for
them and/or are not obliged to do the work they contract to personally.
The Courts have considered many different cases and there are a number
of principles to be applied.
This has ensured the legislation’s intention is upheld whilst maintaining the
flexibility of the Courts to adapt to modern working practices.
Many of the same factors will be considered when determining if someone
is an employee or a limb (b) worker, but with a higher threshold for an
employee. The weighting of each factor will vary depending on the
relationship in question and is a judgement based on the whole picture of
the individual case. This allows the Courts to assess the reality of the
relationship between the individual and the employer. The Courts will also
consider Parliament’s intention in enacting employment legislation – namely
to protect those who are dependent on an employer for their livelihood.
Employee status
Over time the Courts have developed a range of tests to identify whether an
individual is an employee. The following requirements must be satisfied in
order for an individual to be an employee:
personal service – the employee has to do the work themselves (there
may be a limited right to send someone else). For example, an employee
on a 9-5pm contract, who is expected to turn up every day and carry out
work for their employer would satisfy this test. On the other hand, if the
individual can send anyone else in their place (with no restrictions) that
will not be personal service and the individual will not be an employee.
However, even if there is a contractual right to provide a substitute but the

parties have no intention of relying on it and/or it does not reflect how the
agreement works in practice, this does not prevent personal service from
being established
control – the employer is in control of the employee. Control is best
understood as how much freedom the individual has to decide for
themselves over how, where, and when the work is done. Factors to
consider can include who gives out the work, who specifies how, where
and when it is to be done, who sets the rate of pay for each assignment,
who provides the equipment, or whether the individual has to wear a
uniform or specific branding. Day to day control of work is not a
requirement, but the employer must have ultimate control by retaining a
right to give instructions and for the employee to follow them (provided
they were reasonable) or be at risk of disciplinary actions up to and
including dismissal
mutuality of obligation – is a special kind of two-way responsibility –
this will be present during any period when the employer must provide
work and the employee must do the work provided. An individual is not an
employee during periods when they are not working if there is no
commitment to accept further work which may be offered
Limb (b) worker status
The following requirements must be satisfied in order for an individual to be
a limb (b) worker:
any contract (not a contract of employment) whereby an individual
undertakes to perform work or services for the other party. A contract may
be oral or in writing but in order for there to be a contract there must be
an exchange of consideration, for example, each party must provide
something of value to the other party such as the work or service being
exchanged for wages
personal service – mirrors the test for employee, that is, does the worker
have to carry out the work themselves. Furthermore, a person may still be
a limb (b) worker if they have a limited or occasional right to provide a
substitute. On the other hand, an unlimited and unrestricted right to
substitution that is exercised for this test would strengthen arguments for
the self-employed status
is the person working as part of their own professional or business
undertaking and the other party to the contract is a client or
customer? The nature of the contract must be that the relationship
between the parties is not between an independent business and an
independent client/customer as that would imply the individual is selfemployed. Factors that may be relevant are the degree of control
exercised by the employer. This might include, whether the way in which

the service is provided is very tightly defined and controlled by the
employer, whether the individual provides the service in their own name
or the name of the business the individual is working for, who benefits
from customer loyalty and goodwill generated by the provision of the
service, who sets the rate of pay, who does the client pay, what financial
risk does the individual take, the exclusivity of the engagement (does the
individual work with other clients/customers) and its typical duration, what
equipment the worker supplies and/or the level of risk undertaken by the
worker.
Ultimately, Parliament’s intention in enacting employment legislation
recognised that employees and limb (b) workers were in a vulnerable
position with their employers and required statutory protection. The greater
the degree of control exercised by the employer over the work or services
performed by the individual concerned the more likely the person is to be an
employee or a limb (b) worker.
Other factors that may be relevant to employees, limb
(b) workers and the self-employed
Terms and conditions of the contract
Employment status is not just a matter of what the contract (whether oral or
in writing) states or the type of contract you are on (for example permanent,
zero-hours, casual or agency); it is determined by the reality of the working
relationship between the employer and the individual. It takes account of all
the circumstances including the purpose of employment legislation, of which
the written contract (if there is one) is just one aspect.
Even if an employer attempts to create a different employment status
through the terms of the contract, if this does not reflect the reality of the
agreement, this does not change the legal employment status of the
individual which depends solely on the true reality of the relationship. Any
terms which aim to exclude/limit employment rights of individual(s) by
seeking to avoid employee or limb (b) worker status are of no effect and will
be disregarded by the Courts.
Example
An individual enters a contract with their employer to perform work
where they are described as ‘self-employed’. This contract may have a
clause which removes one of the key principles for satisfying the
employee status e.g. a clause providing that the employer does not
have to offer any work and then individual does not have to accept any
work (a mutuality of obligation clause). If this does not reflect the reality

of the relationship and there is in fact mutuality of obligation, then the
individual may well be an employee even though the contract stated the
individual was self-employed.
Financial risk
In general terms, the greater the financial risk (for example, purchasing
assets to use or only being paid if the work is successfully completed) the
more likely that this will be consistent with self-employment. However, the
absence of financial risk doesn’t automatically mean the person is an
employee or a limb (b) worker.
Example
An individual pays to undertake their own professional accounting
qualifications with the ambition of operating their own accountancy firm,
collecting payment for work completed for different clients. In this
circumstance, as the individual paid for their own exams in order to train
and practice accountancy (rather than it being paid for by the employer)
the individual undertook some financial risk. This factor could be used to
strengthen arguments to self-employment, if other factors were also
consistent with this employment status.
Integral to the organisation
In certain circumstances, integration to the organisation can be a factor
consistent with employee or limb (b) worker status. Examples of this can
include that the individuals assist other members of a team, are part of a
management structure or are subject to company disciplinary procedures.
The existence of these factors can point towards limb (b) worker or
employee status. However, their absence is not fatal to establishing
employee or limb (b) worker status, particularly where it is part of a
calculated position by the employer to avoid worker status.
Example
An individual has a manager in the business they complete work for that
allocates them work. The individual is also able to advise and assist
other members of a team in the business and is subject to the company
disciplinary procedures and other procedures and policies. This
integration into the organisation could be used to support factors of an
employee or limb (b) worker relationship to their employer.

Equipment
While not necessarily decisive on its own, evidence that the engager
provides the mandatory equipment necessary to do the job (such as
clothing, tools) can be a pointer towards employee or limb (b) worker status.
Example
Television salesmen were being supplied with cars by their employer
and the use of employer equipment was a relevant factor in determining
their employee status in a Court case.
How the individual is paid
An individual that is paid by reference to their output or profit share rather
than hourly wage or annual salary is more likely to be consistent with selfemployed status. However, it is also possible for an employee or other
worker to be paid by reference to their output (such as pieces produced, or
tasks performed).
Example
An office worker is paid £15 an hour for their role as a receptionist,
completing on average 20 hours of work a week. As the individual is
paid for their time, as opposed to output, this factor is likely to be
consistent with a limb (b) worker or employee employment status.
Exclusivity of the arrangement
This concerns an individual’s ability to work with other rival businesses. In
general terms, the more exclusive the arrangement, the more likely that this
would be consistent with employee status. Exclusivity may also be a pointer
to limb (b) worker status, but as limb (b) workers often have more flexibility
in working for different (and sometimes rival) organisations it would not be
decisive.
Example
A consultant works for a number of different organisations, with varying
clients each week. This factor makes it more likely the individual may be
self-employed.
Example
An individual provides their services as a driver through a number of
different apps. They are free to choose which app to use to obtain work,
but the way in which they provide the service through each app is tightly
constrained by the relevant app. While the freedom to work for rival
businesses may point towards self-employment, the level of control to
which the individual is subject when working through any app may point
towards limb (b) worker status.
Genuinely in business on your own account
Is best understood as running your own business and is often linked to
other factors such as providing or using your own equipment, having
financial risk in your work and/or whether you had a pre-existing business. If
the individual provides or uses their own equipment, has financial risk in
their work and/or had a pre-existing independent business, the individual
may be more likely to be self-employed. However, the presence of any of
these factors including a pre-existing business is not fatal to a person being
either a worker or an employee. It will depend on an assessment of all the
circumstances.
Example
A painter supplies their own paint and brushes, has direct relations with
their clients/customers and negotiates the rate of pay for each individual
customer. These factors make it more likely the individual is genuinely in
business on their own account and self-employed.
Section 4: Special circumstances and
developments in the labour market
Gig economy
New forms of work have emerged in the so-called ‘digital / gig / platform /
crowd’ economies. Recent court cases have shown that the purpose of
employment law is to protect those working for others and regardless of
whether you work in the gig economy, if you satisfy the tests around
employee or limb (b) worker status you will be entitled to the corresponding
statutory employment rights and protections (as described in the
Employment rights table. The example below provides an example of how
control can be exerted by an employer (or engager) in a digital setting via
an app. The control in the example would be enough to satisfy the limb (b)
worker status, providing other factors were also consistent.

Example of control via an app
the engager restricts communication between the passenger and the
driver to the minimum necessary to perform the particular trip and
takes active steps to prevent drivers from establishing any
relationship with a passenger capable of extending beyond an
individual ride
the remuneration paid to drivers for the work they do is fixed by the
engager and the drivers have no say in it (other than by choosing
when and how much to work). The engager fixes its own “service fee”
which it deducts from the fares paid to drivers. The notional freedom
to charge a passenger less than the fare set by engager is of no
possible benefit to drivers as any discount offered would come
entirely out of the driver’s pocket
the contractual terms on which drivers perform their services are
dictated by the engager
although drivers have the freedom to choose when to work, once a
driver has logged onto the engager’s app, a driver’s choice about
whether to accept requests for rides is constrained by the engager
the engager exercises a significant degree of control over the way in
which drivers deliver their services (vets the type of car and uses the
technology to exercise control over the drivers)
Where an individual is a limb (b) worker or an employee, in all
circumstances their employer must determine the worker’s working time for
National Minimum Wage purposes. 

Zero-hours contracts
Generally, this is best understood as a working arrangement in which the
employer does not guarantee the individual any work, and the individual is
not obliged to accept any work offered. Zero-hours contracts can allow
employers to adapt to changes in their circumstances, supporting workforce
flexibility, making it easier to hire new staff, and increasing the pool of
people available to work. These contracts can also give individuals more
choice and the ability to combine their work and other commitments such as
for those who are retired or with caring responsibilities. For example, zerohours contracts are used in the hospitality sector where service take up or
demand cannot be guaranteed, or in the healthcare sector for staff that work
as locums in a specialised role such as a surgeon or doctor and flexible
working suits their current circumstances.
The employment status of an individual on a zero-hours contract will
depend on the facts of the relationship and as such, a zero-hours contract
does not dictate your employment status and an individual could qualify
for any employment status (employee, limb (b) worker or self-employed) for
employment rights purposes. An example of individuals on zero-hours
contracts who were found to be employees by the Courts can be seen in
this example:
Example
A number of care workers sign a contract labelled zero-hours contract
which includes a ‘no mutuality of obligation’ clause. However, this clause
does not reflect the true agreement between the 2 parties as the care
workers are required to undertake work regularly and carry out that work
in specialist positions which are very important for the employer’s
business. Overall, the reality of the working relationship here is likely to
be that the agreement does includes mutual obligations for the
individuals to accept shifts and for the employer to offer work. The
workers are therefore more likely than not to be employees.
Freelancers, contractors, consultants and interims
There is no definition of these categories in legislation. Although
freelancers, contractors, consultants and interims are often self-employed,
they could be either self-employed, a limb (b) worker or an employee
depending on the reality of the relationship, whether they work for a client or
if they are employed by an agency or umbrella company see the agency
worker section. Therefore, a freelancer, contractor, consultant and interim
could be entitled to the rights associated with limb (b) worker or employee
status.
Example
A plumber undertaking several jobs for different customers is likely to be
neither an employee nor a limb (b) worker. They are likely to be
genuinely self-employed and enjoy the freedoms that this status affords
them. However, this plumber could then secure a contract on a large
contract site as one of the resident plumbers. If this is on a purely subcontracting basis to deliver a certain task, the individual may still be selfemployed. But if the individual is hired to carry out a personal service
due to their skillset, and is unable to send someone else in their place to
carry out the work, it is more likely the individual is a limb (b) worker.
The plumber could therefore be a limb (b) worker for one contract whilst
still being self-employed for other work contracts.
Agency workers
You are an agency worker if you have a contract with an agency but you
work temporarily for a hirer. Agency workers may qualify for employee or
limb (b) worker employment rights depending on their relationship with their
employer. Agency workers are usually employed by the employment
business itself unless an intermediary is involved (i.e. an umbrella
company). It is important to identify who the employer is as they are
responsible for ensuring that agency workers receive employment rights.
Agency workers receive certain protections, irrespective of whether they are
an employee or a limb (b) worker such as the right to be paid the National
Minimum Wage for hours worked, the right to paid annual leave,
whistleblowing protections, and pension auto-enrolment. They also have
additional protections under the Employment Agencies Act 1973 and the
Conduct of Employment Agencies and Employment Businesses
Regulations 2003, which aim to ensure that work-seekers have free access
to the labour market, can move between jobs within the labour market, and
can use the recruitment sector with confidence. They also receive
protections under the Agency Workers Regulations 2010. This gives agency
workers the entitlement to the same core employment and working
conditions as if they had been recruited directly. Some protections apply
from day 1 and some will apply only once they complete the 12-week
qualifying period in the same role with the same hirer. 
Example
A substitute teacher’s working relationship is that they work on a fixed
assignment for 6 months. The teacher is not employed directly by the
school instead they are on a contract with an employment agency. In
this example, the teacher’s employer is the employment agency and is

therefore responsible for ensuring they get the rights they are entitled to,
whether they are an employee, worker or contracted as self-employed.
Employee shareholder status
Employee shareholder is a separate employment status. Most employees who own
shares in a company they work for do not fall under the employee
shareholder status and keep their employee status. Employers must follow
certain rules when offering employment shareholder status
 to their employees.
An employee shareholder is someone who works under an employment
contract and owns at least £2,000 worth of shares in the employer’s
company or parent company. Whilst employers can choose to provide more
generous employment rights than the statutory ones, employee
shareholders are entitled to all employee employment rights except for:
protection against unfair dismissal – apart from dismissal on grounds of discrimination
and in relation to health and safety
statutory redundancy pay 
the right to request flexible working –
except in the 2 weeks after returning from parental leave
certain statutory rights to request time off for training
Employee shareholders must give 16 weeks’ notice if they want to come
back early from:
maternity leave
additional paternity leave 
adoption leave
Office holders, police and the armed forces
There are special provisions which apply to office holders, (for example
which includes certain company directors, clergy, judges), police officers
and members of the Armed Forces and specific advice should be taken.

Volunteers
Volunteers are not defined in primary
legislation, although Section 44 of the National Minimum Wage Act 1998
does provide an exemption for ‘voluntary workers’. Volunteers are not
exclusive to the charitable sector and can be found across both the public
and private sector. Most volunteers participate in this way either for
philanthropic reasons, or to build skills and experience in a given area.
Volunteers are not legally obliged to work a set number of hours or at all.
Volunteers who willingly accept to be engaged on a voluntary basis are
neither employees nor limb (b) workers and therefore not entitled to any
employment right associated with these statuses. However, for some, the
roles they will be undertaking will be very similar to, if not the same as, paid
individuals alongside them. Volunteers aren’t paid for their time but can be
paid for any out-of-pocket expenses. These expenses could include travel,
postage and telephone costs if working from home, and essential
equipment, such as protective clothing. If a volunteer receives any type of
reward or payment other than expenses, this could impact their employment
status, and they could be classed as an ‘employee’ or ‘worker’ and therefore
be entitled to employment rights and protections.
Interns
Internships are sometimes
called work placements or work experience and are generally understood
as being where an individual works so as to gain relevant professional
experience to improve their career prospects. These terms have no legal
status on their own and do not dictate an individual’s employment status.
Interns can be volunteers, limb (b) workers or employees depending on the
facts of the relationship. If they are a limb (b) worker or employee, they are
entitled to exactly the same employment rights as any other limb (b) worker
or employee. However, true volunteers are not entitled to employment
rights. For example, an employer would not have to pay the minimum wage
if an individual is undertaking work experience that only involves shadowing
an employee, meaning no work is carried out and they are only observing.
Apprenticeships

Apprentices are entitled to the same employment rights as other employees
working at similar grades or in similar roles (including paid holidays, sick
pay, and other benefits and support). Apprentices must spend at least 20%
of their normal working hours training and the National Minimum Wage rate
is different for apprentices.

Section 5: Case studies and sectoral
examples
These indicative examples highlight how factors in different sectoral working
relationships can be considered when determining employment status. The
employee or limb (b) worker tests apply across all sectors.
Case study: Limb (b) worker in the transport sector
Example
A courier driver works for a number of organisations including a delivery
firm, for which they complete a range of shifts each week on a zerohours contract. When they arrive for work with this delivery firm, they are
given a list of the packages that need to be delivered in a specified order
and with a specified route to follow. The driver must use their own van,
wear the organisation’s uniform and stick-on vehicle branding from the
delivery firm. They are paid per delivery (though there is no scope to
vary the route/order). The driver also has a limited right to sub-contract
the work if they were unable to work – they must notify the company and
the substitute driver must have completed a similar training course.
For the purpose of their relationship with this delivery firm, it seems likely
the individual is not working as part of their own professional business as
the degree of control exerted by the delivery firm is too great. The courier
driver is expected to complete the shifts they have accepted, use company
branding and uniform, and follow required routes. The driver also appears to
be required to provide a degree of personal service that’s more compatible
with limb (b) worker or employee status than self-employed status as they
only have a limited right to subcontract with an individual who has
completed similar training. The individual therefore satisfies the personal
service requirement and is working under a degree of control which is
consistent with limb (b) worker status. There are other relevant factors for

this example such as that the individual is not subject to an exclusive
relationship and works for other organisations, is paid per delivery as
opposed to a salary and provides their own van (equipment) pointing
towards a more flexible working arrangement than an employee. Overall, it
is likely this individual is a limb (b) worker.
Case study: Self-employed developer in the
professional business services sector
Example
An IT specialist, with a pre-existing independent business, is brought
into a large organisation to work on a project for 3 months, a few days a
week, to improve the organisation’s website. The individual is highly
skilled as a website designer and during the project, the individual is
given freedom for how and where the work is completed but there is an
expectation the specialist will be available during normal working hours
of the organisation on the days they are working. The individual is not
subject to the same behavioural guidelines as permanent staff and the
relationship is not exclusive. The individual is able to take on additional
work during the length of the contract without permission and is able to
subcontract out their work if required. The individual uses their own
equipment and is paid for their services at a day rate.
Overall, factors such as that the individual has a high amount of control for
how the work is undertaken and that the individual can sub-contract their
work out, it seems likely the individual is not a limb (b) worker or employee.
Instead, those factors point to the self-employed status and that the other
party to the contract is a client or customer. This includes that the
individual is not integrated into the business through being subject to the
same behavioural guidelines as permanent staff, the relationship is not
exclusive and that the individual uses their own equipment and has the
freedom to negotiate their rate of pay.
Case study: Limb (b) worker in the healthcare sector
Example
An individual usually works one day per week in a cosmetic surgery
practice as a plastic surgeon, with some flexibility around turning up to

work on that day. The individual is highly skilled, decides how the
surgery should be performed and is not required to wear a uniform but
general personal protective equipment. The work has to be performed at
the surgery during opening hours. The individual is integrated into the
business (the cosmetic surgery practice markets the surgeon as “our
surgeon”) but they also run other separate businesses. They are paid on
a day-rate-basis which the individual has negotiated with the practice
and they are provided surgical equipment to perform the work. It is
expected that the individual will perform the surgery themselves and the
individual is unable to send a substitute.
In this example, there is evidence of personal service as the surgeon
carries out the procedures themselves. However, there is no obligation for
the practice to offer work to the surgeon and no obligation on the
surgeon to accept offer of work. The individual is subject a low amount of
control as to how the work is carried out and requirements around uniform
but there is control for when and where the individual has to work (during
opening hours at the surgery). The arrangement is also not exclusive (as
the surgeon works for other organisations), and the individual has
negotiated their day rate of pay as opposed to receiving a salary. Overall,
it seems this individual is unlikely to be an employee because the practice is
not obliged to offer them work, nor is the surgeon required to accept work.
The surgeon also has other businesses which might suggest they are selfemployed. However, based on the degree of control that the practice
exerts over the surgeon suggests that the surgeon’s relationship with the
practice is that of a limb (b) worker rather than self-employed.
Case study: Employee in the hospitality sector
Example
A hotel cleaner is allocated cleaning tasks at the start of each shift, told
what equipment to use for each task and provided with a uniform to
wear. The individual is also supervised by a cleaning manager employed
by the hotel who checks on progress regularly, with the individual’s
performance closely monitored. As prior hotel training was provided, the
individual is not entitled to send and pay any substitute to perform the
work. The individual has a contract to perform a certain number of hours
a week and be remunerated for those hours on an hourly basis.
The individual is under a large amount of control from the hotel via
performance management and as they are required to wear a uniform.
There is also a mutual obligation to provide work and for work to be

undertaken as set out in their contract, with the individual not able to provide
a substitute. Other relevant factors include the individual being an integral
part of the business’ ability to run, the lack of financial risk the individual is
under and the individual’s requirement to use the hotel’s equipment to carry
out the work. It is likely the individual is an employee.
Case study: Limb (b) worker in the construction sector
Example
An individual is engaged as a contractor to assist with the construction
of an office block which is running behind. The individual can turn up
and work as they wish, answering to a foreman who gives the individual
a daily list of tasks to carry out. The foreman will make regular checks
on the quality of the individuals’ work. The individual will continue to get
paid for as long as the overall building work takes and if the individual
finishes their tasks early, they will be given more. If the individual does
not finish, they can continue the next day. All required equipment is
provided. The firm expects the individual to do the work personally and
not send a substitute.
The example sets out that the builder / labourer is under a degree of
control while they work as they are monitored by the foreman. There is also
evidence of personal service as the builder/labourer is not able to send a
substitute. Overall, it seems likely the individual is a limb (b) worker. Other
factors are also consistent with limb (b) worker status rather than selfemployed status include that the equipment is provided by the building firm
(not the individual). Employee status is also less likely due to factors such
as lower evidence of mutuality of obligation, the individual’s freedom over
when they work, that they are paid for work done as opposed to a salary
and the lack of integration into the business.
