Time off for family and dependants
1. Your rights
As an employee  you’re allowed time off to deal with an
emergency involving a dependant.
A dependant could be a spouse, partner, child, grandchild, parent, or
someone who depends on you for care.
How much you get
You’re allowed a reasonable amount of time off to deal with the emergency,
but there’s no set amount of time as it depends on the situation.
Example
If your child falls ill you could take time off to go to the doctor and make
care arrangements. Your employer may then ask you to take annual
leave  or parental leave  if you
want to look after your child for longer.
Tell your employer  as soon as possible
how much time you’ll need so it can be agreed.
Limits on time off
There are no limits on how many times you can take time off for
dependants. Your employer may want to talk to you if they think time off is
affecting your work.
Pay
Your employer may pay you for time off to look after dependants but they do
not have to. Check your contract, company handbook or intranet site to see
if there are rules about this.
Exceptions
You cannot have time off if you knew about a situation beforehand. For
example you would not be covered if you wanted to take your child to
hospital for an appointment. You might get parental leave 
instead.
Check your employment status  to see if you’re
classed as an ‘employee’.
Compassionate leave
If you are not given time off for dependants, your employer may allow you
‘compassionate leave’ - this can be paid or unpaid leave for emergency
situations. Check your employment contract, company handbook or intranet
for details about compassionate leave.

2. What's an emergency?
You could get time off when a dependant is involved in the following
emergencies.
Illness, injury or assault
This includes mental or physical illnesses that do not have to be lifethreatening or need full-time care - it could be an existing condition that has
worsened.
For example, if a dependant is mugged without being physically hurt, you
could take time off to comfort or help them.
You can also take time off to arrange longer term care for a dependant.
Having a baby
You could take time off if a dependant goes into labour unexpectedly and
they rely on you to take them to the hospital. You cannot take time off for
dependants after the birth to care for the child, unless it’s an emergency.
However, if you’re the child’s parent you could be entitled to paternity
 or parental leave .
Disruption of care arrangements
You could get time off if:
a child minder or carer does not turn up to look after a dependant
a nursing home or nursery closes unexpectedly
If your child is involved in an incident during school
time
You could get time off if your child has been:
involved in a fight
injured on a school trip
suspended from school

3. Taking time off
Tell your employer as soon as possible if you need time off. If it’s an
emergency, you may not be able to do this before you leave work but you
should let your employer know as soon as possible.
You do not have to do this in writing or give written proof.

4. Problems when you take time off
Your employer must not:
treat you unfairly for taking time off, for example refusing you training or
promotion
dismiss you or choose you for redundancy because you asked for time off
for a dependant
refuse you reasonable time off