Flexible working

1. Overview
Flexible working is a way of working that suits an employee’s needs, for
example having flexible start and finish times, or working from home.
All employees have the legal right to request flexible working. Employees
can request a change to:
the number of hours they work
when they start or finish work
the days they work
where they work
This is known as ‘making a statutory application ’.
Employees can make a request for flexible working from their first day in a
job.
What employers must do
Employers must deal with requests in a ‘reasonable manner’.
Examples of handling requests in a reasonable manner include:
assessing the advantages and disadvantages of the application
discussing possible alternatives to the request
offering an appeal process
Read the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas) code of

If an employer does not handle a request in a reasonable manner, the
employee can take them to an employment tribunal .
An employer can refuse an application if they have a good business reason
for doing so.

2. Types of flexible working
There are different ways of working flexibly.
Job sharing
Two people do one job and split the hours.
Remote working and working from home
Working from anywhere other than the employee’s usual workplace. It can
include working from home.
Hybrid working
A combination of working remotely and working in the employee’s usual
workplace.
Part time
Working less than full-time hours (usually by working fewer days).
Compressed hours
Working full-time hours but over fewer days - for example a 9-day fortnight
(an employee has a day off every other week and works longer hours on the
other days)
Flexitime
The employee chooses when to start and end work (within agreed limits)
but works certain ‘core hours’, for example 10am to 4pm every day.
Annualised hours

The employee has to work a certain number of hours over the year but they
have some flexibility about when they work. There are sometimes ‘core
hours’ which the employee regularly works each week, and they work the
rest of their hours flexibly or when there’s extra demand at work.
Staggered hours
The employee has different start, finish and break times from other workers.
Phased retirement
Default retirement age  has been phased out and older
workers can choose when they want to retire. This means they can reduce
their hours and work part time.

3. Applying for flexible working
Employees can apply for flexible working from their first day in a job. This is
known as ‘making a statutory application.’
The basic steps are:
1 The employee writes to the employer.
2 The employer discusses the employee’s request with them and makes
a decision on it within 2 months - or longer if agreed with the
employee.
3 If the employer agrees to the request, they must change the terms and
conditions in the employee’s contract.
4 If the employer disagrees, they must tell the employee giving the
business reasons for the refusal. The employee may be able to
complain to an employment tribunal .
The employer must discuss the employee’s request with them before
refusing their application.
Employees can make 2 applications for flexible working in any 12-month
period.

Writing to the employer
An employee should email or write a letter to their employer. The Advisory,
Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas) has a flexible working request
employees can use.
Employers may ask employees to use a standard form to make an
application .
What the email or letter must include
The application must include:
the date of the request
a statement that this is a statutory request for flexible working
details of how the employee wants to work flexibly and when they want to
start
a statement saying if and when they’ve made a previous application -
include the date of the previous request
Withdrawing an application
Employees should tell their employer in writing if they want to withdraw their
application.
The employer can treat an application as withdrawn if the employee misses
2 meetings to discuss an application or appeal without good reason, for
example sickness.
The employer must tell the employee they are treating the request as
withdrawn.

4. After the application
Employers must consider flexible working requests in a ‘reasonable
manner’.
They must make a decision within 2 months of the request (or longer if
agreed with the employee).
Read the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas) code of

Agreeing the application
The employer should write to the employee with:
a statement of the agreed changes
a start date for flexible working
Acas has a flexible working request outcome template
employers can use.
The employer should also change the employee’s contract  to include the new terms and
conditions.
This should be done as soon as possible but no later than 28 days after the
request was approved.
Refusing the application
The employer must tell the employee that they’ve refused the application.
Before refusing it, they must have discussed the employee’s request with
them.
Reasons for refusing
Employers can refuse an application for any of the following reasons:
extra costs that will damage the business
the work cannot be reorganised among other staff
people cannot be recruited to do the work
flexible working will affect quality
flexible working will affect performance
the business will not be able to meet customer demand
there’s a lack of work to do during the proposed working times
the business is planning changes to the workforce
Acas has a flexible working request outcome template
employers can use.

5. Appeals
Employees no longer have a statutory right to an appeal but may still be
able to appeal. Employees should check with their employer if they offer an
appeals process.
How to appeal
The employee must follow the company’s procedures for appealing.
The employee or employer should follow the company’s procedures for
solving a workplace dispute  if an application that
has been refused causes problems.
Going to an employment tribunal
Employees can complain to an employment tribunal  if
the employer:
did not handle the request in a ‘reasonable manner’ 
wrongly treated the employee’s application as withdrawn
dismissed or treated an employee poorly because of their flexible working
request, for example refused a promotion or pay rise
refused an application based on incorrect facts
Employees cannot complain to a tribunal just because their flexible
working request was refused.
An employee should complain to the tribunal within 3 months of:
hearing their employer’s decision on their application or appeal
hearing their request was treated as withdrawn 
the date the employer should have responded to their request (but failed
to do so)
If an employer or employee is unsure of their rights, they should get
legal advice.