Case Number: 2203629/2025
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant: Mr A Favara
Respondent: Mr I Iacopini
JUDGMENT
The claimant’s claim for unlawful deductions of wages (under section 13 of
the Employment Rights Act 1996) is dismissed.
REASONS
Background
1. This was a claim for unpaid wages (namely unpaid service charge) by the
claimant. Claimant was employed as a Kitchen Porter/Junior Kitchen Staff
from 29 January 2024 to 26 February 2025.
2. The ET1 was lodged on 5 May 2025 (after ACAS Early Conciliation from
20 March to 1 May 2025)
3. The Final Hearing in this claim was scheduled for 29 October 2025, which
was notified to both parties by the Tribunal on 2 June 2025.
4. On 7 July the claimant wrote to the Tribunal saying he was unable to
attend that hearing as he had to go to GP appointments with his wife who
was disabled. He requested that the hearing be brought forward to
September but said that if it was not possible to change the date then he
would have to “give up continuing with the case”. This does not appear to
be a formal postponement request.
5. The Tribunal had not dealt with this email from the claimant. The claimant
did not “chase” his email of 7 July and did not attend at the hearing on 29
October. He made no further communication with the Tribunal or the
respondent after July 2025.
6. The respondent produced on 22 October 2025 an email (which was taken
as his Witness statement); sent accompanying evidence and did attend
the scheduled hearing.
7. Given the ambiguity of the claimant’s email in July, I proceeded with the
hearing in his absence as allowed under Rule 47 of the Employment
Tribunal Procedure Rules 2024.

Conduct of the Hearing
8. I heard evidence from the respondent on Oath, who adopted his witness
statement as his evidence in chief, and I asked him questions about his
evidence. I also considered the claimant’s ET1 form and the Response
Form. The hearing ran from 2 to 3.05 pm.
9. I gave my decision with Oral Reasons at the end of the hearing, but given
the claimant’s absence at the hearing, have given written reasons as well.
Summary of the Respondent’s evidence
10. The respondent explained that following the introduction of the
Employment Act 2023 (which came into force on 1 October 2024) he
concluded (after speaking to external consultants) that it would be fairest
to arrange a meeting of all relevant employees and get them to vote on a
policy for distribution of service charge/gratuities among all staff members.
11. The meeting was held on 8 October 2024 at Rossodisera Restaurant in
London WC2 and was attended by the majority of staff at the two
restaurants operated by the respondent’s company. The claimant attended
the meeting and had an opportunity to discuss the issues and to vote. The
respondent voted as an employee and so only had one vote in the same
way as any other employee.
12. At the meeting, the unanimous vote of all employees attending was to
agree with the following structure for distribution of the service charge:
- 43% of the monthly service charge is distributed to Tier 1
employees (those with the highest level of responsibility/seniority),
which included the respondent along with two other employees.
- 49.5% of the monthly service charge is distributed to Tier 2
employees, which contains the majority of employees and,
consequently, the majority of hours worked.
- 7.5% of the monthly service charge is distributed to Tier 3
employees to which the claimant Mr. Favara belongs, and which
includes employees with more general and less specialized tasks
and/or with less seniority within the company.
13. The respondent produced signed statements from Ms Possanzini, Mr
Piras and Mr Lorenzini, who all attended the Employees' meeting on the
08/10/24 and who all confirmed the respondent’s evidence as set out
above. None of the above attended to give evidence in person.
14. The respondent produced the claimant’s payslips for October 2024 to
February 2025 which showed the service charge payment as agreed at
the 8 October meeting. I asked him if the claimant had raised any
queries/challenges to his payslips. The respondent said that he had
queried the service charge calculation for January 2025, but he had
explained to the claimant that the amount was lower that month because
there were more Tier 3 employee hours to be taken into account. He said
the claimant accepted this explanation.
15. The respondent said the claimant resigned in early February 2025 for his
own personal reasons, related to the way in which the calculation of his
pension payments in Italy and the UK worked. He did not resign because
of the service charge payments.

16. The claimant had not provided any evidence or witness statement.
Accordingly, I had no reason to doubt the respondent’s evidence.
Conclusions
17. I find that based on the evidence presented to me at the Hearing, the
claimant has not shown on a balance of probabilities than he was owed
any further wages – his claim is dismissed.
Approved by:
Employment Judge D Henderson
29 October 2025