Case No: 2303493/2022
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant: Ms Seelah Lingachetti
Respondent: Care UK Community Partnerships Limited
Heard at: London South (in private in person)
On: 29 November 2023
Before: Employment Judge Heath
Appearances
For the Claimant: In person
For the Respondent: M D O’Dempsey (Counsel)
RESERVED JUDGMENT
1. The claimant’s claims are not struck out.
2. The claimant’s claims are not made subject to deposit orders.
REASONS
Introduction
1. This matter was originally listed for a case management preliminary
hearing on 21 August 2023. A final hearing lasting five days beginning 11
March 2024 had previously been listed. The claimant did not attend the
case management preliminary hearing on 21 August 2023, as it appears
she had technical difficulties.
2. EJ Rice-Birchall, the judge dealing with that preliminary hearing, relisted
the matter, but as a public preliminary hearing, to deal with the following
matters:
Was any complaint presented outside the time limits in sections
123(1)(a) & (b) of the Equality Act 2010 and if so should it be
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
dismissed on the basis that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear
it?
Further or alternatively, because of those time limits (and not for
any other reason), should any complaint be struck out under rule 37
on the basis that it has no reasonable prospects of success and/or
should one or more deposit orders be made under rule 39 on the
basis of little reasonable prospects of success?
Dealing with these issues may involve consideration of subsidiary
issues including whether there was “conduct extending over a
period”; whether it would be “just and equitable” for the tribunal to
permit proceedings on an otherwise out of time complaint to be
brought; when the treatment complained about occurred.
3. A notice of hearing was sent out on 6 September 2023, stating that at the
hearing “an Employment Judge will determine whether the claim is out
of time and the case management”.
Procedure
4. No orders were made in respect of preparing this matter for an public
preliminary hearing. The respondent prepared a 79 page bundle, but there
were no witness statements dealing with the matters for determination.
5. Mr O’Dempsey fairly conceded at the outset of the hearing that the tribunal
would not be able determine as preliminary issue whether the claims were
in time, as the matter had not been properly prepared for the tribunal to
assess the evidence, make findings of fact, apply the law and make the
relevant determinations. However, he submitted that the tribunal was in a
position to hear his application to strike the claims out on the basis of time
bars, or in the alternative to make deposit orders on the same basis. The
claimant agreed to this approach.
6. Prior to the hearing the respondent prepared a draft List of Issues (“LOI”)
where certain information was sought from the claimant in red font. I
expressed the view to the parties that, broadly speaking, this was a useful
LOI. I went through this document with the claimant in an attempt to clarify
the issues in the claim. At certain points Mr O’Dempsey made appropriate
observations of his own to clarify the issues.
7. I then went through paragraphs 11 to 15 of the claimant’s Particulars of
Claim, in which the question of time limits was addressed.
8. I asked the claimant about her financial means and she provided
information.
9. Mr O’Dempsey made oral submissions in which he submitted that I should
strike out the claimant’s claims for being out of time, or in the alternative
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
made them subject to a deposit order. I gave the claimant over the lunch
break to consider any response she wished to make. She made oral
submissions after lunch.
10. I then reserved the decision in respect of these applications, and I when
on to deal with case management of the case, working on the assumption
(but not having decided the point), at this stage, that the claims would
proceed. One relevant case management order I later made was to order
the claimant to provide further information, which had been requested on
four separate occasions by the respondent’s solicitors over the course of
the spring and summer of this year, and which the claimant had not
responded to. I made this the subject of an Unless Order.
The law
Time limits
11. Section 123 EA provides:
(1) Proceedings on a complaint within section 120 may not be
brought after the end of—
(a) the period of 3 months starting with the date of the act to
which the complaint relates, or
(b) such other period as the employment tribunal thinks just
and equitable.
…
(3) For the purposes of this section—
(a) conduct extending over a period is to be treated as done
at the end of the period;
(b) failure to do something is to be treated as occurring when
the person in question decided on it.
12. The key question in determining whether there was conduct extending
over a period is whether there was an ongoing situation or continuing state
of affairs which amounted to discrimination (Hendricks v Metropolitan
Police Commissioner [2002] IRLR 96). The claimant bears the burden of
proving, by direct evidence or inference, that numerous alleged incidents
of discrimination are linked to each other so as to amount to a continuing
discriminatory state of affairs.
13. As to extending time, the Court of Appeal in Abertawe Bro Morgannyg
University Local Health Board v Morgan [2018] IRLR 1050 observed that
the wording of section 120(1)(b) “such other period as the employment
tribunal thinks just and equitable” gives the Tribunal a wide discretion in
considering whether to extend time. Leggatt LJ said that “factors which are
almost always relevant to consider when exercising any discretion whether
to extend time are: (a) the length of, and reason for, the delay and (b)
whether the delay has prejudiced the respondent (for example, by
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
preventing or inhibiting it from investigating the claims while matters were
fresh).”
14. Tribunals are encouraged to “assess all the factors in the particular case
which it considers relevant to whether it is just and equitable to extend
time, including in particular… ‘The length of, and the reasons for, the
delay’ ” (Adedeji v University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust
[2021] EWCA Civ 22).
15. Reviewing the authorities, the learned editors of Harvey’s set out a non-
exhaustive list of factors that may prove helpful in assessing individual
case:
a. the presence or absence of any prejudice to the respondent if the
claim is allowed to proceed
b. the presence or absence of any other remedy for the claimant if the
claim is not allowed to proceed;
c. the conduct of the respondent subsequent to the act of which
complaint is made, up to the date of the application;
d. the conduct of the claimant over the same period
e. the length of time by which the application is out of time;
f. the medical condition of the claimant, taking into account, in
particular, any reason why this should have prevented or inhibited
the making of the claim;
g. the extent to which professional advice on making a claim was
sought and, if it was sought, the content of any advice given.
16. Section 23 Employment Rights Act 1996 (“ERA”) provides:
(2)Subject to subsection (4), an employment tribunal shall not
consider a complaint under this section unless it is presented
before the end of the period of three months beginning with—
(a)in the case of a complaint relating to a deduction by the
employer, the date of payment of the wages from which the
deduction was made, or
(b)…
(3)Where a complaint is brought under this section in respect of—
(a)a series of deductions or payments, or
(b)a number of payments falling within subsection (1)(d) and
made in pursuance of demands for payment subject to the
same limit under section 21(1) but received by the employer
on different dates, the references in subsection (2) to the
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
deduction or payment are to the last deduction or payment in
the series or to the last of the payments so received.
(3A)Section 207A(3) (extension because of mediation in certain
European cross-border disputes) and section 207B (extension of
time limits to facilitate conciliation before institution of proceedings)
apply for the purposes of subsection (2).
(4)Where the employment tribunal is satisfied that it was not
reasonably practicable for a complaint under this section to be
presented before the end of the relevant period of three months, the
tribunal may consider the complaint if it is presented within such
further period as the tribunal considers reasonable.
17. The test of practicability means what could have been done not what
would have been reasonable. Reasonably practicable does not mean
“reasonable” or “physically possible” but is analogous to “reasonably
feasible” (see Palmer and Or v Southend-On-Sea BC 1984 ICR 372, CA).
The burden of proof is on the claimant to show that it was not reasonably
practicable to present the claim in time Consignia v Sealy [2002] IRLR
624.
Time limits and preliminary hearings
18. In the case of E v X and others UKEAT/0079/20 the EAT reviewed
previous authorities and identified a number of key principles to be applied
when time points are being considered at a preliminary hearing. I set them
out in full:
h. In order to identify the substance of the acts of which complaint is
made, it is necessary to look at the claim form: Sougrin.
i. It is appropriate to consider the way in which a claimant puts their
case and, in particular, whether there is said to be a link between
the acts of which complaint is made. The fact that the alleged acts
in question may be framed as different species of discrimination
(and harassment) is immaterial: Robinson.
j. Nonetheless, it is not essential that a positive assertion that the
claimant is complaining of a continuing discriminatory state of
affairs be explicitly stated, either in the claim form, or in the list of
issues. Such a contention may become apparent from evidence or
submissions made, once a time point is taken against the claimant:
Sridhar.
k. It is important that the issues for determination by the tribunal at a
preliminary hearing have been identified with clarity. That will
include identification of whether the tribunal is being asked: (1) to
consider whether a particular allegation or complaint should be
struck out, because no prima facie case can be demonstrated; or
(2) substantively to determine the limitation issue: Caterham.
l. When faced with a strike-out application arising from a time point,
the test which a tribunal must apply is whether the claimant has
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
established a prima facie case, in which connection it may be
advisable for oral evidence to be called. It will be a finding of fact for
the tribunal as to whether one act leads to another, in any particular
case: Lyfar.
m. An alternative framing of the test to be applied on a strike-out
application is whether the claimant has established a reasonably
arguable basis for the contention that the various acts are so linked
as to be continuing acts, or to constitute an on-going state of affairs:
Aziz; Sridhar.
n. The fact that different individuals may have been involved in the
various acts of which complaint is made is a relevant, but not
conclusive, factor: Aziz.
o. In an appropriate case, a strike-out application in respect of some
part of a claim can be approached assuming, for that purpose, the
facts to be as pleaded by the claimant. In that event, no evidence
will be required – the matter will be decided on the claimant's
pleading: Caterham.
p. A tribunal hearing a strike-out application should view the claimant's
case, at its highest, critically, including by considering whether any
aspect of that case is innately implausible for any reason:
Robinson.
q. If a strike-out application succeeds, on the basis that, even if all the
facts were as pleaded, the complaint would have no reasonable
prospect of success (whether because of a time point or on the
merits), that will bring that complaint to an end. If it fails, the
claimant lives to fight another day, at the full merits hearing:
Caterham.
r. Thus, if a tribunal considers (properly) at a preliminary hearing that
there is no reasonable prospect of establishing at trial that a
particular incident, complaint about which would, by itself, be out of
time, formed part of such conduct together with other incidents,
such as to make it in time, that complaint may be struck out:
Caterham.
s. Definitive determination of an issue which is factually disputed
requires preparation and presentation of evidence to be considered
at the preliminary hearing, findings of fact and, as necessary, the
application of the law to those facts, so as to reach a definitive
outcome on the point, which cannot then be revisited at the full
merits hearing: Caterham.
t. If it can be done properly, it may be sensible, and, potentially,
beneficial, for a tribunal to consider a time point at a preliminary
hearing, either on the basis of a strike-out application, or, in an
appropriate case, substantively, so that time and resource is not
taken up preparing, and considering at a full merits hearing,
complaints which may properly be found to be truly stale such that
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
they ought not to be so considered. However, caution should be
exercised, having regard to the difficulty of disentangling time points
relating to individual complaints from other complaints and issues in
the case; the fact that there may be no appreciable saving of
preparation or hearing time, in any event, if episodes that could be
potentially severed as out of time are, in any case, relied upon as
background to more recent complaints; the acute fact-sensitivity of
discrimination claims and the high strike-out threshold; and the
need for evidence to be prepared, and facts found (unless agreed),
in order to make a definitive determination of such an issue:
Caterham
Strike out and deposits
19. Rule 37 of the ET Rules provides:-
At any stage of the proceedings, either on its own initiative or on the
application of a party, a Tribunal may strike out all or part of a claim
or response on any of the following grounds—
(a) that it is scandalous or vexatious or has no reasonable
prospect of success;
20. In Mechkarov v Citibank NA [2016] ICR 1121 the EAT summarised the
principles that emerge from the authorities in dealing with applications for
strike out of discrimination claims:
''(1) only in the clearest case should a discrimination claim be struck
out; (2) where there are core issues of fact that turn to any extent
on oral evidence, they should not be decided without hearing oral
evidence; (3) the Claimant's case must ordinarily be taken at its
highest; (4) if the Claimant's case is “conclusively disproved by” or
is “totally and inexplicably inconsistent” with undisputed
contemporaneous documents, it may be struck out; and (5) a
Tribunal should not conduct an impromptu mini trial of oral evidence
to resolve core disputed facts.''
21. The guidance in Mechkarov followed from a line of authorities including
Anyanwu v South Bank Students’ Union [2001] IRLR 305 and Eszias v
North Glamorgan NHS Trust [2007] IRLR 603. Chandok v Tirkey [2015]
ICR 527 shows that there is not a “blanket ban on strikeout application
succeeding in discrimination claims”. They may be struck out in
appropriate circumstances, such as a time-barred jurisdiction where no
evidence is advanced that it would be just and equitable to extend time, or
where the claim is no more than an assertion of the difference in treatment
and a differencing protected characteristic. Eszias also made clear that a
dispute of fact also covers disputes over reasons why events occurred,
including why a decision-maker acted as they did, even when there is no
dispute as to what the decision maker did.
22. In Ahir v British Airways plc [2017] EWCA 1392 the Court of Appeal held
that tribunal’s should “not be deterred from striking out claims,
discrimination claims, which involve a dispute of fact if they are satisfied
that there is indeed no reasonable prospect of the facts necessary to
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
liability being established, and also provided they are keenly aware of the
danger in reaching such a conclusion in circumstances where the full
evidence has not been heard and explored, perhaps particularly in a
discrimination context”.
23. Rule 39 ET Rules provides: -
(1) Where at a preliminary hearing (under rule 53) the Tribunal
considers that any specific allegation or argument in a claim or
response has little reasonable prospect of success, it may make an
order requiring a party (“the paying party”) to pay a deposit not
exceeding £1,000 as a condition of continuing to advance that
allegation or argument.
(2) The Tribunal shall make reasonable enquiries into the paying
party's ability to pay the deposit and have regard to any such
information when deciding the amount of the deposit.
24. In the case of Hemdam v Ishmail [2017] IRLR 228 the Court of Appeal
gave guidance to tribunals on the approach to deposit orders. The
guidance included:-
a. The test for ordering a deposit is different to that for striking out
under Rule 37(1)(a).
b. The purpose of the order is to identify at an early stage claims
with little prospect of success and to discourage the pursuit of
those claims by requiring a sum to be paid and creating a risk of
cost. It is not to make access to justice difficult or to effect a strike
out through the back door.
c. When determining whether to make a deposit order a tribunal is
given a broad discretion, is not restricted to considering purely
legal questions, and is entitled to have regard to the likelihood of
the party being able to establish the facts essential to their case
and reach a provisional view as to the credibility of the assertions
being put forward.
d. Before making a deposit order there must be a proper basis for
doubting the likelihood of a party being able to establish facts
essential to the claim or the defence.
e. A mini trial on the facts is not appropriate.
The timeline and the submissions of the parties
25. I provided the parties with a brief chronology that I prepared prior to the
hearing. The claimant has been ordered to provided further details, but
some key dates are as follows, with an indication of how she frames
certain claims (in brackets):
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
a. On 13 January 2021 the claimant began working as “bank” nurse
having previously worked for the respondent in a permanent role.
b. The claimant alleges that she was not given payslips, and given
incorrect wages in September 2021 (wages). She also says she
was given a poor reference, (race discrimination).
c. In December 2021 she says she was not paid when she was
shielding (wages).
d. On 14 December 2021 she was referred to as a “Coolie” (race -
related harassment).
e. In March 2022 she was allocated low levels of staff on shifts (race
discrimination). She says that derogatory remarks were made about
her because of her Asian heritage (race related harassment).
f. In April 2022 various different people made various discriminatory
comments (race -related and age-related harassment).
g. On 20 April 2022 a shift was cancelled (race discrimination).
h. In May 2022 the claimant did not work for the respondent as she
was unable to log into their system. On 25 May 2022 a shift was
cancelled (race discrimination).
i. On 16 June 2022 the claimant put in a grievance to the
respondent’s CEO Mr Knight.
j. 30 June 2022 ACAS Early Conciliation commenced.
k. In July 2022 the claimant was not paid for training (wages).
l. Payslips not provided from September 2021 to August 2022, and
paid incorrectly (wages).
m. On 10 August 2022 the claimant was provided an Early Conciliation
certificate.
n. On 11 August 2022 the claimant was not paid for attending a
meeting (wages). This was a meeting with Mr Taylor who was
dealing with her grievance.
o. On 17 August 2022 her insurer referred her to Arc Legal.
p. On 30 August 2022 she was referred to DAS Legal.
q. In September 2022 she was not given a shift (race discrimination).
r. In late August or September 2022 the claimant was given an
outcome to her grievance by Mr Taylor.
s. On 6 October 2022 the claimant presented her ET1.
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
26. The claimant also made a number of undated allegations, which she will
provide details of pursuant to an Unless Order. She said that she was
denied shifts, her complaints were not investigated, she was not given
permanent shifts, she was paid less than other staff, she was falsely
accused and scolded, and less qualified people were promoted. She
alleges these were acts of race discrimination. She said that she was told
that workers of other races have more rights than her, her shifts could be
cancelled in favour of others and that she could go home if she questioned
this; she was also falsely scolded and accused. She says that this was
race related harassment. She also says she was told to work overtime and
not paid for this (wages).
27. The claimant also expanded on a couple of points at the hearing. She said
that her solicitors had been responsible for the delay. She said that the
solicitor assigned to her did not work every day. She said she was trying to
phone them every day in August. She said that she had spoken to a
number of people at the solicitors firm. She said because of illness or
holidays, solicitors could not deal with her claim. She also said that she
had a problem with computers and the Internet. Mr O’Dempsey fairly
noted the wording in paragraph 13a of the particulars of claim “The
deadline was missed and the claimant has issued her claim at the earliest
opportunity”. The passive voice, in a document obviously pleaded by a
legal professional, could possibly be an indication that the solicitors were
at fault.
28. The claimant also referred to having experienced depression from 2018
which had got worse. She has been prescribed antidepressant medication
(and was specific about the type of medication and the dose) and
described her difficulty waking up, her lack of energy, her lack of sleep,
headaches and stress. She said she found it difficult making decisions and
was relying too much on her solicitors. She also described other physical
health difficulties. She said that everything was a struggle, and depression
has had an impact on her life, which she finds it impossible to control.
29. Mr O’Dempsey submitted that the multiple requests for further information
were a relevant factor for the tribunal to take account of in considering
applications to strike out or for a deposit. The failure to provide particulars
makes it difficult for the claimant to show that there was a reasonable
prospect of her establishing an act extending over a period. He submits
that waiting for the result of an internal investigation is not good enough
reason to delay putting in the claim. He submits that DAS is a large insurer
which surely would have been able to provide cover if her nominated
solicitor had been sick or on holiday. There was no evidence of any
misleading information being given to the claimant. Even if the solicitors
missed the deadline negligently, this would not constitute exceptional and
persuasive circumstances. The respondent, he says, is prejudiced. The
claimant has put her claim in a vague way and a lot will depend on oral
evidence. The matter is already getting stale and the respondent is at risk
of losing a limitation defence, and the prospect of losing finality of
litigation. He applies to have all claims struck out, or in the alternative
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
subject to a deposit order as there is either no, or little prospect of the
claimant establishing her claim was in time.
Conclusions
The deadline
30. Looking at the chronology, Date A, for early conciliation purposes, is 30
June 2022. Date B is 10 August 2022. The last allegation under the
Equality Act 2010 is the cancellation of the shift on 25 May 2022. The
whole of the Early Conciliation would be within the three month limitation
period for this claim. An extension under section 140B(3) Equality Act
2010 (i.e.. not counting the 41 days between Date A and Date B) would be
to 4 October 2022.
31. The last pleaded deduction from wages allegation before ACAS Early
Conciliation process is the failure to pay when shielding in January 2022.
However, the claimant makes further allegations for non-payment of
wages in July and 11 August 2022.
Acts extending over a period
32. In respect of the wages claims, on the face of it, and taking the claimant’s
case at its highest but looking at it critically, the claimant appears to be
alleging that there was an ongoing failure to provide her with payslips and
concurrent failure to pay her correct wages. I note that the claimant is due
to provide further information in respect of when the underpayments were
made and how much. Until such clarity is given, it is impossible for me to
say that the claimant has little or no prospect of establishing a series of
underpayments from October 2021 to August 2022.
33. In respect of the Equality Act 2010 claims, taking the claimant’s case at its
highest, it does appear to be the case that the claimant is alleging that
senior managers treated her less favourably in the allocation of shifts over
a period of time. She also appears to be alleging that these managers
made racially derogatory remarks and age related comments along with
other members of staff. Whether she will establish this on the evidence in
due course is another matter, but, despite the shortcomings in the
pleadings, I cannot conclude that there is little or no prospect of the
claimant establishing an act extending from December 2021 to 25 May
2022.
Just and equitable/not reasonably practicable extension
34. As set out above, the claimant has some reasonable prospect of
establishing that there is a series of deductions to August 2022. In the
circumstances, it would appear that she does not need to rely on the
reasonably practicable extension under section 23(4) ERA. Had I been
required to consider this, I would have concluded that there is not little or
no reasonable prospect of the claimant establishing such an extension. It
was not my function to conduct a mini trial on these issues, but the
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017

Case No: 2303493/2022
combination of waiting for the grievance outcome, the problems with the
solicitor and the claimant’s depression have a bearing on this issue. For
the purposes of the applications to strike out I have taken the claimant’s
assertions at face value and at their highest. For the purposes of the
deposit application I have subjected her assertions to somewhat more
critical analysis. Her specificity about her medication, and the symptoms
she describes of her depression lead me to the conclusion that there is
some (as opposed to little or no) reasonable prospect of her establishing
that her illness in conjunction with other matters made it not reasonably
practicable for her to put her claim in on time.
35. In respect of the Equality Act 2010 claims, the matters I have referred to in
the previous paragraph (the grievance, solicitors and her state of health)
lead me to the conclusion that there is some reasonable prospect of the
claimant establishing that it would be just and equitable to extend time to
present her claimant to present her claims. The extension in this case
would be a short one.
36. I make the point that I have not made findings of fact, but looked at the
pleadings and heard the submissions of the parties, and it will be for the
tribunal at the final hearing, if time points are in issue, to look at the
evidence, make findings of fact, apply the law and reach conclusions on
the time issues. All I have done here, is determine that it is not my
conclusion that there is little or no reasonable prospect of the claimant
establishing that her claims were brought in time.
37. I also record that I am not unsympathetic to Mr O’Dempsey’ s submission
that the claimant’s failure to plead her case clearly is problematic.
However, I have addressed that issue by imposing an Unless Order.
38. In all the circumstances, I refuse the respondent’s applications to strike out
the claims, or to make the claims subject to deposit orders. In the
circumstances, I will not set out the information I received about the
claimant’s means during the course of the hearing.
Employment Judge Heath
Date: 11 December 2023
10.5 Reserved judgment with reasons – rule 62 March 2017