Case No: 2305181/2021
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant Respondent
Mr T Tamponi V Medequip Assistive Technology Limited
JUDGMENT ON RECONSIDERATION APPLICATION
The claimant’s application dated 20 September 2022 for a reconsideration of the case
management order dated 5 September 2022 is refused because it is not competent and
his complaint about the issues is rejected.
REASONS
1. In a Case Management Order dated 5 September 2022, the Employment Tribunal
ordered:
5. Issues
On or before 6 January 2023, the respondent shall provide a draft list of issues
to the claimant. These are to be agreed by 17 February 2023.
2. In a letter to the Tribunal dated 20 September 2022, the claimant seeks reconsideration
of the Order. Any application for the reconsideration of a judgment must be determined in
accordance rules 70 to 74 of the Employment Tribunal Rules of Procedure 2013.
Rules
6. The relevant employment tribunal rules for this application read as follows:
RECONSIDERATION OF JUDGMENTS
Principles
70. A Tribunal may, either on its own initiative (which may reflect a request from the
Employment Appeal Tribunal) or on the application of a party, reconsider any
judgment where it is necessary in the interests of justice to do so. On reconsideration,
the decision (“the original decision”) may be confirmed, varied, or revoked. If it is
revoked it may be taken again.
Application
1

Case No: 2305181/2021
71. Except where it is made in the course of a hearing, an application for
reconsideration shall be presented in writing (and copied to all the other parties) within
14 days of the date on which the written record, or other written communication, of the
original decision was sent to the parties or within 14 days of the date that the written
reasons were sent (if later) and shall set out why reconsideration of the original
decision is necessary.
Process
72.— (1) An Employment Judge shall consider any application made under rule 71. If
the Judge considers that there is no reasonable prospect of the original decision being
varied or revoked (including, unless there are special reasons, where substantially the
same application has already been made and refused), the application shall be
refused, and the Tribunal shall inform the parties of the refusal. Otherwise, the
Tribunal shall send a notice to the parties setting a time limit for any response to the
application by the other parties and seeking the views of the parties on whether the
application can be determined without a hearing. The notice may set out the Judge’s
provisional views on the application.
(2) If the application has not been refused under paragraph (1), the original decision
shall be reconsidered at a hearing unless the Employment Judge considers, having
regard to any response to the notice provided under paragraph (1), that a hearing is
not necessary in the interests of justice. If the reconsideration proceeds without a
hearing the parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to make further written
representations.
(3) Where practicable, the consideration under paragraph (1) shall be by the
Employment Judge who made the original decision or chaired the full tribunal which
made it; and any reconsideration under paragraph (2) shall be made by the Judge or
the full tribunal which made the original decision. Where that is not practicable, the
President, Vice President or a Regional Employment Judge shall appoint another
Employment Judge to deal with the application or, in the case of a decision of a full
tribunal, shall either direct that the reconsideration be by such members of the original
Tribunal as remain available or reconstitute the Tribunal in whole or in part.
7. In accordance with rule 70, a tribunal may reconsider any judgment “where it is
necessary in the interests of justice to do so”. On reconsideration, the decision
may be confirmed, varied, or revoked. If it is revoked it may be taken again.
8. The application of 20 September 2022 seeks reconsideration of the list of Issues,
but this was a consent order to which Rule 70 does not apply.
9. The Tribunal provided in its case management orders that:
2 Complaints and issues
The parties must inform each other and the Tribunal in writing within 14 days of the
date this is sent to them, providing full details, if what is set out in the Case
2

Case No: 2305181/2021
Management Summary section above about the case and the issues that arise is
inaccurate and/or incomplete in any important way.
10. The Tribunal proceeded on the basis that the claimant had an issue with the issues.
It went on to consider the points made by the claimant as far as they could be understood.
11. The claimant states that that the burden of proof about the supposed fairness of
his dismissal should still be on the respondent. This is not correct. The burden is
neutral. The claimant states the burden of proof in regard to the discrimination
claim should be shared between the two parties. The initial burden is on the
claimant and thereafter it may rest on the respondent.
12. The Tribunal did not consider in detail the proposed list of issues as it seemed to
contain lengthy narratives from the claimant which would not be appropriate for
inclusion in a list of issues. The Tribunal also does not intend to intrude on
discussions between the parties as to the contents of the list of issues as it was
agreed that these would be concluded by 17 February 2023.
13. The Claimant’s application for reconsideration of the order dated 5 September
2022 is refused because it is not competent and his complaint about the issues is rejected.
____________________
Employment Judge Truscott KC
Date 26 September 2022
Sent to the Parties on:
06 October 2022
For the Tribunal:
J Fernandez
3