Case No: 2307383 / 2024
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant: Mr John Paul Harrop
Respondent: IQ EQ Administration Services (UK) Ltd
Heard at: London South Tribunal (by CVP)
On: 26 and 27 August 2025
Before: Employment Judge Richter
REPRESENTATION:
Claimant: Mr Smith (Solicitor)
Respondent: Ms Moss (Counsel)
JUDGMENT WITH REASONS
The judgment of the Tribunal is as follows:
The Claim Form
1.1 On 1 October 2024 Mr Harrop presented to the Employment Tribunal an ET1
claim form. IQ-EQ (a multinational Investment Services Company) were named
as the respondents.
1.2 On the form Mr Harrop identified the title of his employment as ‘Group Funds
Adviser’ and at Question 5.1 identified that his employment with the respondent
had ended on 17 April 2024. At Question 8.1 on the form, when asked to identify
the type of claim the single box ‘I was unfairly dismissed’ was ticked. At
Question 8.2 - within a body of narrative - Mr Harrop set out the claim (which
he continued at Question 14) detailing the history of his employment with the
Respondent and how he had come to be made redundant on 17 April 2024. He
detailed how he had appealed that decision through the respondent’s internal
processes which had finally concluded on 15 July 2024.
1.3 Mr Harrop further detailed in those sections how shortly after the 15 July 2024
decision had been made his wife had been diagnosed with breast cancer which
1

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
had meant he had needed to concentrate on family matters and so was just
now submitting the ET1.
1.4 Attached with the ET1 was an ACAS early conciliation certificate which showed
that ACAS had been notified by Mr Harrop on 24 September 2024 and
conciliation had ended on 26 September 2024.
1.5 The core then of Mr Harrop’s claim is that his dismissal was unfair. He asserts
the ‘redundancy process’ conducted by the respondent was a sham and had
been pre-determined. He claims that he was in truth dismissed to prevent him
being entitled to the full benefit of the sale of shares were held in trust. The
ultimate benefit to him may he believes be in the region of 10 million euros.
1.6 The respondent denies Mr Harrop’s allegations. It maintains that his
redundancy was necessary for legitimate business reasons and at all times a
fair and proper procedure was followed to reach the conclusion that his
dismissal had to occur. It denies that the process was in any way motivated or
influenced by the potential equity in any share sale.
1.7 These competing positions would then broadly would be the focus of
determination at any final hearing but I am not called upon to decide them and
I make no findings in relation to the merits or otherwise of the claim.
Preliminary Issues
2.1 Two days were originally identified for the final hearing of the claim to take place
on 26 and 27 August 2025.
2.2 On 27 June 2025 by a Case Management Order EJ Aspinall converted those
dates to a public preliminary hearing to address a preliminary issue namely
whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the claim, given – as it was
expressed in the order - that:
a) The effective date of termination was 17 April 2024
b) The primary time limit (for presenting a claim) expired on 16 July 2024
c) ACAS Early Conciliation commenced on 24 September 2024; and
d) The claim was presented on 1 October 2024
2.3 The parties have therefore prepared for the hearing in those terms and having
confirmed that position with the parties at the outset, this has been a public
2

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
preliminary hearing conducted in accordance with the Employment Tribunal
Procedure Rule 52(1)(b) to determine preliminary issues.
2.4 I have had regard to the following written material:
Preliminary Hearing Bundle running to 116 pages
Skeleton argument on behalf of the claimant
Draft list of issues for full hearing on behalf of the claimant
Claimant’s Timeline for preliminary hearing
Claimant’s list of witnesses for preliminary hearing
Claimant’s list of witnesses for the full hearing
Claimant’s authorities bundle
3x Medical letters on behalf of the Claimant
5x Pages of emails and contract of employment on behalf of the Claimant
1x Page of emails on behalf of the Claimant
Respondent’s draft list of issues for preliminary hearing
Respondent's skeleton argument for preliminary hearing
Respondent authorities bundle
5x emails provided by Respondent
2.5 Yesterday (26 August 2025) I heard evidence from Mr Harrop and submissions
from Mr Smith and Ms Moss in relation to the issue identified above and as to
whether further preliminary issues, which had been identified in
correspondence between the parties, namely whether a separate claim for
‘Part-time Worker detriment’ was included in the originating process and if the
Tribunal had jurisdiction to hear such a claim.
The Law
3.1 It is convenient at this point to set out certain aspects of the relevant law:
s.111 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 (“ERA”), so far as is relevant,
mandates that the Employment Tribunal shall not consider a complaint (of unfair
dismissal) under this section unless it is presented to the tribunal
a) before the end of the period of three months beginning with the
effective date of termination; or
3

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
b) within such further period as the tribunal considers reasonable in a
case where it is satisfied that it was not reasonably practicable for the
complaint to be presented before the end of that period of three months.
s.97 ERA – sets out (as far as is relevant) that the Effective Date of Termination
is:
a) in relation to an employee whose contract of employment is
terminated by notice, means the date on which the notice expires.
s.95 ERA addresses dismissal and subsection 1(a) reads as follows:
An employee is dismissed if, and only if,
a) The contract under which he is employed is terminated by the
employer (whether with or without notice).
Effective Date of Termination
4.1 Raised in argument before me is an issue as to dismissal and so more
fundamentally the ‘Effective Date of Termination’ (“EDT”).
4.2 The letter of dismissal – said to be due to redundancy – relied upon by the
respondent is at pp.80 - 81of the bundle. It sets out that meetings with the
claimant had occurred on 7 and 13 March and 2 April 2024 to discuss the
situation. It noted that all alternatives to redundancy had been considered but
ultimately it concluded that the respondent was:
“… sorry to inform you that your position as Group Funds Advisor is
redundant and that your employment will therefore terminate due to this
redundancy. You are not required to work your notice and you will be paid in
lieu of it, meaning that your termination date and last day of work is 17 April
2024.”
4.3 Attached to the letter was a financial statement which set out the payments due
in respect of redundancy pay, notice pay – paid for a period of 6 months – and
holiday pay. In total a figure in the region of £45,000 was determined which was
to be paid to Mr Harrop.
4

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
4.4 In argument on behalf of the claimant it is now submitted that the letter did not
have the effect of terminating the contract. It is submitted that during 2023 Mr
Harrop had agreed a contractual variation which placed his employment onto a
‘12 month rolling contract’. Details of the discussions in respect of this aspect
were provided in evidence by the claimant and email exchanges supporting this
were provided to the Tribunal under separate cover.
4.5 I have had regard to the emails but note that what is clear from them is that no
formal document recording the full terms of any contractual variation was ever
drawn up. The claimant asserts that this was deliberate action, with malign
intent, on the part of the respondent to try and frustrate the already agreed
variation of his contract.
4.6 The ultimate submission made by Mr Smith however is that Mr Harrop had
successfully varied his contract of employment which, by the time of
discussions concerning any redundancy, was now of a ‘rolling nature’ every 12
months. With that in mind Mr Smith submits that the 17 April 2024 is not
accepted to be the EDT as it is said that the notice given in the letter sought to
terminate a different contract which Mr Harrop was no longer employed under.
4.7 It is right to observe that this is not a point that was ever raised by the claimant
in the representations he made during the meetings concerning the redundancy
process, or through the internal process of appealing that decision or indeed
within the ET1 claim form. It is also right to observe that no evidence has been
provided or submission made as to how this newly varied contract might be
effectively terminated. Mr Smith makes no submission as to how the varied
contract of employment was actually brought to an end. Nor does Mr Smith,
when asked, make any submission as to when the claimant asserts that the
EDT did occur in this case.
4.8 The respondent denies that the contract was varied in the way described by the
claimant. Of some interest the respondent does not rely upon the employment
contract terminating on 31 January 2024 (which the original contract was
expressed as doing) and it accepts that Mr Harrop remained employed and
working until the 17th April 2024.
4.9 The respondent submits however that it gave proper and effective notice of
termination of any employment contract which Mr Harrop was employed under.
5

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
It is submitted that Mr Harrop was paid in lieu of notice so if, for example, Mr
Harrop genuinely believed he was entitled to 12 month’s notice (as opposed to
6 months) because of any contractual variation than this ‘money claim’ is an
issue he could have raised through the appeals process or brought as a claim
within the ET1 form. In any event they contend such an issue does not affect
the validity of the dismissal.
4.10 In his evidence Mr Harrop accepted that he last worked for the Respondent on
17 April 2024. He accepted that he understood that he was given this date as
his EDT. He accepted that he had received the payments set out in the Financial
Statements appended to the dismissal letter and he further explained that his
wife had told him that the money had come into his accounts and he had
effectively ‘banked the money’ whilst the internal appeal process continued in
case a position was reached where he had to repay it.
Findings and Conclusions on EDT
4.11 I have looked with care through the correspondence brought to my attention
within the bundle, in my view, this makes clear that Mr Harrop understood that
his employment had been terminated on 17 April 2024. In his evidence Mr
Harrop explained that he understood the Respondent’s appeal process was
focussed on whether to maintain or overturn the decision which had been made
to terminate his employment on 17 April 2024 and I am satisfied that was his
understanding at the time.
4.12 In my judgment I do not need to resolve any issue of contractual variation – I
would not be in a position to do so in any event not having heard witnesses
from the respondent.
4.13 What I must determine is whether Mr Harrop was actually dismissed and if so
when. I am reminded by Ms Moss that termination is a question of fact and law.
I note the clear terms of the letter. It gives express notice that the claimant’s
employment will terminate. It is also clear from the letter that it is said that the
claimant’s position as Group Funds Adviser is made redundant. The wording is
clear and unambiguous. It does not express itself as tied to any particular
employment contact and I am satisfied that whatever the contractual position
the letter was giving clear notice of termination of the claimant’s position. I then
further note that payments were made to Mr Harrop in respect of the termination
of his employment. I note the accepted position that Mr Harrop did not complete
any further work for the Respondent after 17 April 2024. I note that throughout
6

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
the correspondence in relation to his internal appeal and for the documentation
prepared for the Employment Tribunal claim Mr Harrod has consistently
referred to his employment as having being terminated. I can find no basis for
saying that the claimant’s employment extended beyond the 17 April 2024 and
I am therefore satisfied on the evidence and find as a fact that the EDT in this
case was 17 April 2024.
The Primary Time Limit - Was the claim presented in time?
5.1 Given the EDT s.111 ERA requires that the ET1 claim form should have been
presented by 16th July 2024. As set out above the claim form was presented on
1st October 2024 around two and half months after the expiry of that primary
time limit.
5.2 I note that no involvement with ACAS took place during the period of the primary
time limit so as to extend it. I find therefore as a fact that the claim was
presented out of time.
5.3 Two further considerations then arise for consideration:
1. Is the tribunal satisfied that it was not reasonably practicable for the complaint
to be presented within the primary time limit? and
2. If it was not reasonably practicable, were the claims made within such further
period as the tribunal considers reasonable?
‘Reasonably practicable’ - Why the claim was not presented in time?
6.1 Giving evidence Mr Harrop explained that he had not submitted the claim by 16
July 2024 as his understanding was that he had three months to present a claim
from the outcome of the final internal appeal hearing. He said that he had ‘heard
about this from people’. He said he had thought ‘that the courts would want to
see that you had done all you could to appeal’ the decision internally before
7

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
bringing a claim and so that he had three months to bring a claim from the
internal appeal decision.
6.2 Mr Harrop gave further evidence that his wife had had been undergoing medical
investigations in respect of suspected breast cancer as from around late June
and the diagnosis he said was confirmed on 19 July 2024. He said that the
focus of his life had at that point to be on his wife and children and he could not
focus upon the ET1 until after his wife’s treatment had settled in around the
middle of September 2024.
6.3 When cross examined it was put to Mr Harrop that he had not submitted the
claim within the primary time limit because he had assumed he had three
months from the outcome of the appeal process and he agreed with this
proposition. When asked who he had heard this from Mr Harrop said it was
people he had been speaking to. He accepted that he had internet access and
access to sources of advice but he said he did not believe he had researched
the process of bringing an employment claim as he had expected the
respondent to act ‘honourably’ in the internal appeal process and that he had
heard that there was 3 months to bring a claim from the end of that process.
6.4 In respect of Mr Harrop’s wife’s cancer diagnosis three medical letters have
been produced by the claimant to the tribunal:
- The first is dated 30 May 2024 and invites Mrs Harrop to a mammogram
screening on 24 June 2024. Mr Harrop gave evidence that this
appointment was prompted as his wife had herself detected a lump
which was, as would be expected, greatly concerning.
- The second letter is undated inviting Mrs Harrop for further testing on 11
July 2024. Giving evidence Mr Harrop says that at this appointment he
and his wife were told to ‘prepare for the worst’ and that they took this to
mean a cancer diagnosis was likely.
- The third letter is dated 19 July 2024 and gave a diagnosis of breast
cancer. In the ET1 form and in his evidence in chief, as set out above,
Mr Harrop detailed the effect of the diagnosis of cancer as meaning from
that point on he had to focus upon his family to the exclusion of
employment related issues. In re-examination Mr Harrop’s evidence
varied slightly to detailed that his wife’s medical situation had had a
devasting effect upon their family lives as from late June such that he
could not attend to this employment issue.
8

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
6.5 I have no doubt that the finding and diagnosis of Mrs Harrop’s condition would
have had a significant impact on Mr Harrop and his family. I am entirely satisfied
and find as a fact that that impact would naturally have escalated throughout
the period set out above as the further testing was conducted and as a fear of
cancer was replaced with diagnosis, prognosis and treatment. I have no doubt
that from the point of diagnosis onwards it was reasonable for Mr Harrod to
have focussed his immediate attention on his family life.
6.6 The tribunal has every sympathy for the situation in which Mr Harrop and his
family found themselves. What I must assess however is the impact that this
medical dimension had upon Mr Harrod’s ability to present the claim form within
the primary time limit given that he asserts that it did play a part in his inability
to present the claim. In so doing I must note that sadly many people experience
traumatic medical events which deeply affect them personally and their families.
I have to observe however that often people are able to and do still attend to
significant personal matters, including the filing of legal proceedings, whilst they
personally are undergoing testing and even treatment for very serious
conditions.
6.7 Having heard the evidence I am not satisfied that the medial situation of Mr
Harrop’s wife did play any significant part in preventing the presentation of the
claim within the primary time limit. As acknowledged above whilst the period of
investigation would no doubt have been a period of increasing stress and I keep
in mind the extra burden that this would have placed upon Mr Harrop, it would
not in my judgment have prevented Mr Harrop from filing the ET1 form in time.
It is clear that this developing situation occurs at the end of the primary time
limit and, in my view importantly, the actual confirmation of a diagnosis of breast
cancer occurs after the time limit had already expired. Mr Harrop’s evidence in
re-examination that the effect of the ongoing medical situation was such that he
could not attend to matters as from late June is at odds with the narrative within
the ET1 form and with his evidence in chief and cross examination I can not
accept that it had such an all consuming impact at that relatively early stage of
the process.
6.8 As to the effect of the diagnosis and then treatment on Mr Harrop’s ability to file
the claim form after the primary limitation period I make no finding.
9

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
6.9 In any event the primary reason asserted by Mr Harrop for the failure to submit
the claim form in time was his belief that the time limit expired at the conclusion
of the internal appeal process. I am satisfied on the evidence I have heard and
find as a fact that this was the reason that the claim form was not submitted in
time. In simple terms Mr Harrop made a mistake as to when the claim should
be presented and it is this error which prevented him from submitting the claim
in time.
Was it not reasonably practicable to present the claim in time?
The Law
6.10 I have been referred to several helpful authorities. I am reminded that the onus
is on the claimant to prove that it was not reasonably practicable to bring the
claim in time Porter v Bandridge Ltd [1978] ICR 943
6.11 I remind myself that test is strict one in the sense that it requires the tribunal to
focus on whether it was reasonably feasible for the claim to have been filed in
time. I keep in mind though that this test should give a liberal interpretation in
favour of the employee – Marks & Spencer v Williams-Ryan [2005] ICR
1293.
6.12 It is clear that a mistaken belief by an employee as to the proper time to exercise
a right which they are aware of can render it ‘not reasonably practicable’ for a
claim to have been presented in time if that belief is reasonably held.
6.13 I note that what is reasonable must be considered in a case specific context.
There are, for example, a wide variety of claimants who bring claims to the
Employment Tribunal. Some have limited education and/or command of
English and/or have no ready access to sources of assistance or advice. Other
claimants however are different and are in different circumstances.
6.15 In the Marks & Spencer case I note that a combination of advice by a citizens
advice bureau to pursue an internal appeal combined with insufficient and
misleading advice by the employer and stress upon the claimant from a teacher
training course were sufficient to permit a finding that it was not reasonably
practicable to present the claim in time and for there to be an extension of time
(although it was felt on appeal that that was potentially a generous finding to
the employee).
10

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
6.14 A belief by a claimant that the internal appeals system had to be exhausted
though is not necessarily sufficient to justify a finding that it was not reasonably
practicable to present a complaint to a tribunal within the time limit. Such has
long been established with Bodha v Hampshire Area Health Authority 1982
ICR 200, EAT – being just one example.
6.15 Ms Moss highlights Loweri Beck Services Limited v Patrick Brophy [2019]
EWCA Civ 2490 where Underhill LJ VP set out at para 12(3)&(5):
“If an employee misses the time limit because he or she is ignorant about
the existence of a time limit, or mistaken about when it expires in their
case, the question is whether that ignorance or mistake is reasonable. If
it is, then it will have been reasonably practicable for them to bring the
claim in time (see Wall’s Meat Co Ltd v Khan [1979] ICR 52); but it is
important to note that in assessing whether ignorance or mistake are
reasonable it is necessary to take into account any enquiries which the
claimant or their adviser should have made.”
And
“The test of reasonable practicability is one of fact and not of law”
Factual position
7.1 I must consider then the factual situation in this case, Mr Harrop gave evidence
that he was conducting the representations he made in respect of redundancy
and through the internal appeal process and the submission of the ET1 claim
form himself. I find as fact that this was the position.
7.2 It is clear from the evidence that Mr Harrop is a successful businessman. When
giving evidence he was articulate and intelligent. He gave evidence that as a
professional businessman working in a large multinational business he is used
to taking a methodical approach to complex issues. He accepted that he has
been involved in HR issues at work and had sat on various hearings for HR
matters. I do not of course regard any such experience as imputing any special
knowledge to Mr Harrop, but I am satisfied that it would no doubt have provided
at least some exposure to employment issues and an awareness of the
necessity, even above his experience from business dealings, to ensure that
the correct processes were followed.
11

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
7.3 Mr Harrop accepted he had access to the internet and I am entirely satisfied
that he would have been able to conduct his own personal research as to his
employment rights without any difficulty.
7.4 Importantly though Mr Harrop accepted that he had access to other sources of
advice and I find as fact he did. Mr Harrop detailed in evidence that he was
discussing his employment situation with a friend, who was an HR consultant,
who was assisting him at the time. Mr Harrop was also professionally consulting
from an early stage with Mr Smith. Mr Smith who appears to represent him at
this hearing is a qualified solicitor practising in the areas of commercial law and
non-contentious employment law. Mr Harrop references the fact that he was
receiving his professional advice throughout his correspondence in connection
with the redundancy appeal process and I am satisfied therefore that Mr Harrop
had ready access to specialist advice and assistance.
7.5 I am satisfied that Mr Harrop knew he had a right to bring a claim to the
Employment Tribunal as again this is set out clearly within the correspondence
during the internal process in connection with the proposed redundancy.
7.6 Mr Harrop asserts that he believed he had three months for the end of internal
appeal process because of what he had ‘heard from people’. He did not specify
who he had heard this information from beyond it being ‘word of mouth’. Mr
Harrop specifically said he did not ask the friend with an HR background who
was providing him with assistance. Nor did he ask Mr Smith who he was paying
to advise him and I am satisfied that he did not.
7.7 A key consideration then at this stage is whether it was reasonable to have
expected Mr Harrop to have sought information and advice as to the
enforcement of his rights i.e. found out the correct time limit for presenting the
claim?
7.8 It is worth noting that it is argued by the claimant that the respondent in essence
deliberately delayed the internal appeal process so that he was left with just two
days left to run on the primary time limit after the notification of the final outcome
of the appeal. It is submitted by Mr Smith that the respondent ‘gamed the
system’ in this way. I note that no evidence of deliberate manipulation has been
presented and I am satisfied that the material submitted within the bundle tends
to show a thoughtful and considered internal appeal process. In any event
whatever period of time the internal appeal process took misses the core
question for the tribunal at this stage which must focus on the reasonableness
of Mr Harrop’s ignorance of the correct time limit.
12

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
7.9 Ms Moss highlights from the correspondence generated by the claimant during
the redundancy and internal appeal process material which she says shows
that Mr Harrop was not only aware of the right to present a claim to the
Employment Tribunal (as set out above) but which demonstrates his ready
access to professional advice and other sources of information and support. In
particular she highlights:
- At the first meeting to discuss potential redundancy on 7 March 2024 Mr
Harrop at the end of the meeting commented that “This comes across as a ‘fait
accompli’ given I was shut out 6-8 weeks ago (20th Jan). My lawyers can add
to this based on the bigger puzzle.” Mr Harrop explained in evidence that this
was a reference to Luxembourg lawyers who he had instructed in connection
with the company shares issue.
- At the second meeting on 13 March 2024 Mr Harrop provided a written
statement in which he set out that he felt that there were grounds for
‘constructive dismissal’ as from January 2024 and that he should remain
employed until legal action in Luxembourg had resolved as otherwise he would
‘commence action withing the UK courts’. Cross examined about this Mr Harrop
explained that he was by now receiving professional advice although he was
‘taking the lead’ on how to phrase things. He explained that this came from both
the lawyers he had instructed in Luxembourg and from Mr Smith. Mr Harrop
explained that he had a professional relationship with Mr Smith and was paying
him to provide advice through this period albeit with a focus on the issue of
shares held in trust.
- At the final meeting on 2 April 2024 Mr Harrop provided a further script which in
the concluding paragraph said: “Once redundancy is confirmed, my U.K.
lawyers will commence legal proceedings against IQEQ for unfair and wrongful
dismissal on the grounds of discrimination due to my part-time status”. Mr
Harrop confirmed in evidence that this reference to a UK lawyer was to Mr
Smith.
7.8 Ms Moss further highlights that Mr Smith was copied in to email
correspondence regarding the internal appeal process and that that
documentation too refers to him having taken professional advice – see for
example pages 83,84,85 and 96 of the bundle.
Findings and Conclusion on ‘Reasonably practicable’
13

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
8.1 Considering the factual position in my judgment I am satisfied that it was
reasonable for Mr Harrop to have sought information and advice as the time for
presentation of any complaint to the Employment Tribunal:
1) I am satisfied that it is not difficult to find information about the correct primary
time limit from even a cursory search of the internet. In my judgment, even with
all that was occurring in Mr Harrop’s life during the period of the primary time
limit (and even with particular regard to his wife’s developing illness) it was still
in my judgement reasonable to expect Mr Harrop to have made some enquiry
as to the time limit for bringing a claim. It is clear that he was well aware of the
substantial impact that the termination of his employment may have. He was
clearly actively involved in contesting the decision to make him redundant and
was considering and drafting material to make submissions to contest the
decision. A simple check of the internet would have revealed the correct
information as to presentation within a matter of moments.
2) Put another way, as a professional man used to dealing with complex business
operations it was in my judgment unreasonable of him to simply accept and rely
upon ‘word of mouth’ reports as to the time for bringing a claim. These reports,
made by unspecified and seemingly unqualified individuals, were clearly
objectively unsatisfactory when Mr Harrop was acutely aware of the importance
of the substance matter.
3) Whilst Mr Harrop in evidence says he had ‘faith’ in the internal appeal system,
which it is said mitigates the necessity to have conducted research, this is not
supported by the contemporaneous documentation. From the material
submitted Mr Harrop was asserting during the internal process, as he does now,
that the whole process was in fact pre-determined. This again supports my view
that it was reasonable for Mr Harrop to have made some efforts to clarify the
time limit for submission of an ET1, from independent and professional sources,
given it appears he had at least in serious contemplation the possibility that his
internal appeal would fail.
4) It is also clear that Mr Harrop had ready access to professional advice. He had
informal guidance from an HR professional and he had retained specialist legal
advice. Whilst I accept he did not ask them for advice in connection with the
time limit in my judgment it was reasonable for him to have done so. It is clear
he readily had the means to seek even further specialist employment advice if
they were unable to provide the required information. It is then in my judgment
reasonable to have expected Mr Harrop to have made enquiries and sought
advice as to the time limit for presentation of the ET1 claim form.
14

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
8.2 Having considered the matter with great care and applying the test as I must I
am satisfied, and I find as a fact, that it was reasonably practicable for Mr Harrop
to have presented the complaint of unfair dismissal within the period of 3
months from the effective date of his termination. It was reasonable to have
expected him to have ascertained the correct time limit and had he done so he
clearly could have complied with it even despite all that was occurring in his life
at the time. Accordingly, despite the sympathy the tribunal has for the medical
situation which faced Mr Harrop at the time, the complaint of unfair dismissal
was submitted ‘out of time’ and this tribunal does not have jurisdiction to
consider the complaint which must therefore be dismissed.
Part Time Worker detriment
9.1 One other matter has been raised at this hearing which it is agreed requires
determination as a preliminary issue.
9.2 Within the ET1 form Mr Harrop set out in the narrative of his claim how having
negotiated a contractual variation during the course of 2023 – as I have set out
above – it was then refused because it was said (in an email dated 20
December 2023) no changes could be made at that stage of the investment
cycle other than for those employed full time. Mr Harrop asserted that this
discriminated against him as he was a part time worker.
9.3 As set out above no separate claim was specifically identified at section 8.1 of
the ET1 as being made under the Part-time Workers (Prevention of Less
Favourable Treatment) Regulations 2000 (“The Regulations”).
9.4 Within the ET3 response form the respondent set out that it was:
‘unclear whether or not the Claimant intends to bring this as a separate
claim to his unfair dismissal claim. The Claimant is called upon to clarify
if he wishes to bring this as a separate claim and if so the Respondent
requests further and better particulars of this claim including details of
the alleged less favourable treatment and the comparator relied upon.’
9.5 In correspondence with the Tribunal dated 9 Jan 2025 Mr Smith on behalf of
the claimant set out the following:
“We feel it is worth highlighting the significance of the Part-Time Worker
element of Mr Harrop’s claim. Is it clear that Mr Harrop was treated less
15

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
favourably because of his part-time status, as evidenced in the message
from Mr Chris Marsden on 20th December 2023. Regulation 5 from Part-
time Workers (Prevention of Less Favourable Treatment) Regulations
2000 sets out the basis of such a claim. This states that a Part-time
worker has the right not to be treated by his employer less favourably
that the employer treats a comparable full-time worker (a) as regards
the terms of his contact; or (b) by being subjected to any other detriment
by any act, or deliberate failure to act, of his employer.”
“In relation to the Respondent’s attempt to have this case considered to
be time-barred, the test for extending time to raise a ‘less favourable
claim’ is set out in Regulation 8(4) and says “A tribunal may consider any
such complaint which is out of time if in all the circumstances of the case
it considers that it is just and equitable to do so”.
9.6 Despite that correspondence no application was ever made to amend the ET1
form or to provide further details and none has been made to date. In addition
the draft list of issues prepared by the claimant in respect of the final hearing
and submitted for consideration at this hearing does not include any reference
to issues in relation to a free standing ‘part time workers detriment’ claim.
9.7 Ms Moss submits that any claim under the above regulations has not been
properly particularised within the ET1. She sets out that in particular no actual
comparator has been identified. The only individual mentioned is not employed
in the same jurisdiction and could not properly be regarded as a comparator for
the purposes of the regulations. Ms Moss draws my attention to the authority of
Carl v University of Sheffield [2009] ICR 1286 where giving judgment Judge
Peter Clake confirmed that for a complaint made under the regulations an
actual and not a hypothetical comparator is required.
9.10 Ms Moss further submits that the respondent has interpreted the comments
made within the ET1 as part of the complaint made in respect of the unfairness
of the dismissal and not as a free-standing claim. She says that the respondent
would be prejudice by the inclusion of any such claim now as the witness
statements and case material, which have all been prepared already for the
final hearing, have not addressed this issue and considerable further evidence
would be needed to address it. In any event Ms Moss submits that the claim at
the moment remains too unclear to be responded to in any event.
16

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
9.11 Mr Smith however asserts that the claim should be regarded as a free-standing
complaint made within the ET1 form. He asserts that the substance of the
complaint is obvious and that the claimant should not be prevented from
pursuing this claim even if it is out of time, as the tribunal may consider a claim
if it ‘just and equitable’ to do so. Mr Smith submits that this is a broader test than
the application of the ‘reasonably practicable’ test in relation to the presentation
of an unfair dismissal complaint.
9.12 It is right to observe that Regulation 8(2) of the Regulations provides that an
employment tribunal may consider a complaint which is presented before the
end of the period of 3 months of (to paraphrase) the last example of
unfavourable treatment. Regulation 8(3) of the Regulations provides that the
Tribunal may consider any complaint brought outside of that time limit if it is just
and equitable to do so.
9.13 In respect of whether a tribunal might find it just and equitable to hear a claim
Mr Smith provides a summary number of authorities which I have considered
namely:
Bexley Community Centre v Robertson [2003] IRLR 434
British Coal Corporation v Keeble & others [1997] IRLR 336
Abertawe Bro Morganwg University Local Health Board v Morgan [2018]
ICR 1194
9.14 I must determine first though if the ET1 does include a complaint brought under
the Regulations. As set out I note that Mr Harrop drafted the ET1 himself, he is
not a lawyer and as such a perfect standard of drafting is not required. What
would be necessary in my judgment however is an articulation of the complaint,
an identification of the detriment suffered and, given the decision in Carl
referred to above, the identification of an actual comparator.
Findings and Conclusions
9.15 Looking at the ET1 and considering the submissions which have been made to
me I find I can not say with any clarity what the complaint under the Regulations
is said to be made here.
17

Case No: 2307383 / 2024
9.16 It has been asserted in argument before me that Mr Harrop’s contract was
actually varied during the course of negotiations in 2023. This it has been made
clear is the Claimant’s position. In my judgment that argument as advanced
does not correlate with the allegation made in the ET1 which appears to allege
that the contractual variation was refused because of Mr Harrop’s status as a
part time worker. It has not been explained how these two positions could be
run in contradiction to each other and so it is unclear what the complaint is
under the Regulations is and what the detriment suffered is said to have been.
Further, it is clear no valid comparator is identified either in the ET1 nor has one
been in the course of argument.
9.17 Overall, for the reasons set out above, even accepting that Mr Harrop is not a
lawyer, I am not satisfied that a freestanding complaint is made under the
Regulations in the ET1 form which was submitted.
9.18 Even if I am wrong in that conclusion I note that any such claim would again
have been brought outside of the primary time limit. Would it be ‘just and
equitable’ for the tribunal to hear the claim? This is clearly a broader test than
the one of ‘reasonably practicable’ considered above but as a starting point I
come back to consider the factual situation as I have set it out above in respect
of the unfair dismissal claim.
9.19 I then further identify that by the time Mr Harrop was drafting the ET1 form and
during the course of preparation for this hearing he has had access to legal
advice and assistance. He has had an ability to research the claim he was
making and to seek to amend the claim form as invited to by the respondent at
an early stage. I note the fact that the argument advanced now, that his contract
was varied, is in contrast to the supposed basis for the claim which is sought to
be brought. I have regard to the fact that the respondent would be prejudiced
by having the expense of further preparation in order to address this new
complaint if it were permitted to proceed. Whilst I have in mind that a refusal to
permit such a claim to continue will deprive Mr Harrop of an opportunity to
present a case on this aspect balancing all the factors I do not consider that it
would be just and equitable to allow any complaint under the regulations to be
brought.
18