Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant: Christopher Turner
Respondent: Paul Hartmann Limited
Heard at: Manchester On: 1-12 July 2024 and
12-13 August 2024 (in
chambers)
Before: Employment Judge McDonald
Mr A Murphy
Mr P Dobson
REPRESENTATION:
Claimant: Ms N Dinnes (Solicitor)
Respondents: Mr J Boyd of Counsel
JUDGMENT
The unanimous judgment of the Tribunal is that:
Complaints under the Equality Act 2010
1. The complaint of harassment related to disability (s.26 Equality Act 2010) is not
well-founded and is dismissed.
2. The complaint of unfavourable treatment because of something arising in
consequence of disability (s.15 Equality Act 2010) is not well-founded and is
dismissed.
3. The complaint of victimisation (s.27 Equality Act 2010) is not well-founded and
is dismissed.
Unfair Dismissal
4. The complaint of unfair dismissal is well-founded. The claimant was unfairly
dismissed.
5. There is a 100% chance that the claimant would have been fairly dismissed in
within a period of 6 Weeks of his actual date of dismissal.
1

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
6. The respondent unreasonably failed to comply with the ACAS Code of Practice
on Disciplinary and Grievance Procedures 2015 (“the ACAS Code”) and it is
just and equitable to increase the compensatory award payable to the claimant
by 25% in accordance with s 207A Trade Union & Labour Relations
(Consolidation) Act 1992.
7. The claimant caused or contributed to the dismissal by blameworthy conduct
and it is just and equitable to reduce the compensatory award payable to the
claimant by 100%.
8. It is just and equitable to reduce the basic award payable to the claimant by
100% because of the claimant’s conduct before the dismissal.
9. The respondent shall pay the claimant the following sums:
(a) A basic award of £0.00.
(b) A compensatory award of £0.00
REASONS
Introduction
1. By a claim form dated 22 September 2021 (Case no.2411199/2021), the
claimant brought complaints of disability discrimination. By a claim form dated 13 May
2022 (Case no.2403516/2022), the claimant brought further complaints of disability
discrimination and a complaint of unfair dismissal. At a preliminary hearing on 20
September 2022, the Tribunal directed that the cases be heard together.
2. The respondent accepted that the claimant was at all relevant times a disabled
person by reason of both autism spectrum disorder (“ASD”) and cancer. In this
judgment we have adopted the approach taken by the claimant in his witness
statement and in the documentary evidence when it comes to terminology referring to
autism. We have referred to ASD as the claimant’s diagnosis, to “the claimant’s
autism”, to him as an “autistic person” and to the claimant’s “condition”. We accept that
“Asperger’s” or “Asperger’s syndrome” are no longer used as diagnostic terms and are
considered controversial, but have used them where we are quoting from evidence in
the case which used these terms.
Application for an Anonymity Order
3. During submissions, Ms Dinnes confirmed that the claimant sought an
anonymity order under rule 50(1) and (3)(b) of the 2013 Rules of Procedure (now Rule
49 of the Employment Tribunal Procedure Rules 2024). We reserved our decision on
that issue. We have decided not to grant the application. We have set out our reasons
for that decision in our written order of today’s date.
Preliminary Matters
2

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
4. At the start of the hearing, we dealt with the scope of the case and what
reasonable adjustments we should make in hearing the case to take into account the
claimant’s disabilities.
The scope of this final hearing
5. The parties agreed that the hearing would deal with liability only. A separate
remedy hearing would be listed if required.
6. One of the protected acts relied on by the claimant for his victimisation claim
included his bringing an employment tribunal claim against the respondent in
2018.The respondent accepted that was a protected act for the purposes of s.27(2) of
the Equality Act 2010. That 2018 claim was settled through ACAS via a COT3
agreement.
7. We made it clear to the parties we were not deciding that 2018 claim. However,
some of the incidents which we understood were included in that 2018 claim were
important as background matters to the issues we were deciding. It was not suggested
that evidence about those incidents should be excluded because of the COT3
settlement.
Reasonable Adjustments in hearing the case
8. At the start of the hearing, we discussed what adjustments might be required to
the way we conducted the hearing to alleviate the impact of the claimant’s disabilities.
9. We gave the claimant the opportunity to consider whether the layout of the
Tribunal room needed to be adjusted in any way to enable him to give his best
evidence. He confirmed no such adjustment was required.
10. We discussed and agreed other adjustments with the parties. We accepted that
the claimant’s hypersensitivity to touch meant that he was dressed less formally than
others might for a Tribunal hearing. We agreed that the claimant could take more
regular breaks than would usually be the case. That reflected both the impact of his
autism and the fact that he had had surgery on his mouth because of his cancer. That
made speaking for long periods of time painful for him.
11. The hearing was held in public. On some days, including when the claimant
was giving evidence, we had a number of observers present. The claimant confirmed
that he had no objection to those observers being present.
12. Ms Dinnes submitted that it was important for the Tribunal to be aware of the
impact of ASD on the way the claimant might present when giving evidence. She
submitted that we should before the start of the evidence read Dr David Ruthenberg’s
Expert Witness Report (pp. 1336-1364 of the joint hearing bundle) (“Dr Ruthenberg’s
Report”) to get an insight into how the claimant’s autism might manifest when he was
giving evidence. We did so.
13. Ms Dinnes also submitted that the claimant's autism meant that clear and direct
communication was required when asking him questions. When it came to assessing
the claimant’s credibility as a witness and the reliability of his evidence she submitted
that the claimant’s tone modulation may be idiosyncratic and that the claimant’s autism
3

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
might affect his body language when giving evidence. We took those submissions and
the expert evidence that we read into account in assessing the credibility of the
claimant as a witness and the reliability of his evidence.
The Issues
14. The issues in the case were set out in an agreed List of Issues. We have
annexed it to this judgment. It was agreed that we would deal with liability but not
remedy. However, we would deal with Polkey, contribution and the ACAS Code.
15. During the hearing the claimant clarified that:
• Logically, the protected acts which post-dated the detriment of not being
provided with the pay rise requested in May 2021 could not have been a cause
of that alleged act of victimisation in breach of s.27 of the Equality Act 2010.
• the claimant's harassment complaint was based on an allegation that there had
been unwanted conduct having a harassing effect rather than unwanted
conduct with a harassing purpose.
The Hearing
16. After discussing the issues and potential reasonable adjustments with the
parties, the Tribunal spent day 1 of the hearing reading the witness statements and
key documents in the case including Dr Ruthenberg’s Report.
17. We heard the claimant’s oral evidence on days 2-4. From Day 5 to the morning
of Day 10 we heard the respondent’s witnesses’ evidence. The Tribunal was unable
to sit on the afternoon of day 9 due to the Employment Judge having a pre-existing
commitment.
18. Both Mr Boyd and Ms Dinnes provided written closing submissions. We heard
oral submissions from them on the afternoon of Day 10. There was limited time to do
so and we gave the parties permission to file additional written submissions by 26 July
2024, limited to the points they were not able to cover in their oral submissions.
19. The Tribunal met in chambers on 12-13 August 2024 to make its decision. The
Employment Judge apologises to the parties that, as explained to the parties,
absences from the Tribunal due to his ill-health have led to a delay in finalising this
judgment. He is grateful for their patience in that regard.
20. Relevant Law
Unfair Dismissal
21. Section 94 of the ERA gives an employee a right not to be unfairly dismissed
by their employer. To qualify for that right an employee usually needs two years'
continuous service at the time they are dismissed, which the claimant had in this case.
22. In determining whether a dismissal is unfair, it is for the employer to show that
the reason (or if more than one the principal reason) for dismissal is one of the
potentially fair reasons set out in s.98(2) of ERA or “some other substantial reason
justifying dismissal” (“SOSR”). A dismissal following a breakdown in the employment
4

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
relationship can be a dismissal for SOSR (Ezsias v North Glamorgan NHS Trust
2011 IRLR 550, EAT).
23. The reason or principal reason is derived from considering the factors that
operate on the employer's mind so as to cause him to dismiss the employee. In
Abernethy v Mott, Hay and Anderson [1974] ICR 323, Cairns LJ said, at p. 330 B-
C:
"A reason for the dismissal of an employee is a set of facts known to the employer, or it
may be of beliefs held by him, which cause him to dismiss the employee."
24. If the employer shows a potentially fair reason or dismissal then s.98(4) provides
that:
the determination of the question whether the dismissal is fair or unfair (having regard
to the reason shown by the employer)—
(a) depends on whether in the circumstances (including the size and administrative
resources of the employer’s undertaking) the employer acted reasonably or
unreasonably in treating it as a sufficient reason for dismissing the employee, and
(b) shall be determined in accordance with equity and the substantial merits of the
case.
25. In Turner v Vestric [1981] IRLR 23, the EAT held that where a dismissal was
due to a breakdown in a working relationship it was necessary, before deciding
whether or not the dismissal was fair, to ascertain whether the employer had taken
reasonable steps to try to improve the relationship. To establish that the dismissal was
not unfair, the employers had to show not only that there had been a breakdown but
that the breakdown was irremediable.
26. The EAT in Vestric went on to say that "before somebody in that position is
dismissed on this ground there must be some sensible, practical and genuine efforts
to see whether an improvement can be effected."
27. In Matthews v CGI IT UK Ltd [2024] EAT 38 the EAT agreed with the
submission that this does not mean "all" reasonable steps must be taken by the
employer. It also agreed that where an employer is to blame for the breakdown, it may
be reasonable to expect them to do more to repair the relationship. "
28. In terms of what constitutes a fair process where the reason for dismissal is the
breakdown of the employment relationship, Phoenix House Ltd v Stockman 2017
ICR 84, EAT held that the ACAS Code does not apply to dismissals for some other
substantial reasons in the sense that it does not set out a specific process which an
employer needs to follow to dismiss for that reason. That appears to be inconsistent
with the EAT decision in Lund v ST Edmund's School, Canterbury
UKEAT/0514/12/KN in which Keith J considered that an employee dismissed for
alienating his colleagues, which was characterised as being a dismissal for some other
substantial reason did have the protection of the ACAS Code.
29. In Rentplus v Coulson [2002] EAT, the EAT expressed doubt about the
correctness of Phoenix. HHJ James Tayler said he “inclined to the view that the ACAS
Code is applicable even if it said that dismissal is for SOSR because it resulted from
the response of fellow employees to the misconduct or poor performance that had led
5

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
to a breakdown in working relationships.” It was not necessary to formally decide the
point but he considered it “clear that the applicability of the ACAS Code is a matter of
substance rather than form. I do not consider that an employer can sidestep the
application of the ACAS Code by dressing up a dismissal that results from concerns
that an employee is guilty of misconduct, or is rendering poor performance, by
pretending that it is for some other reason such as redundancy.”
Remedy for Unfair dismissal
30. When it comes to the compensatory award for unfair dismissal, section 123(1)
of the 1996 Act provides:
“(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and sections 124 and 126, the amount of
the compensatory award shall be such amount as the tribunal considers just and
equitable in all the circumstances having regard to the loss sustained by the
complainant in consequence of the dismissal in so far as that loss is attributable to
action taken by the employer.”
31. It has been established since Polkey v A E Dayton Services Limited [1988]
ICR 142 that in considering whether an employee would still have been dismissed
even if a fair procedure had been followed, there is no need for an all or nothing
decision. If the Tribunal thinks there is doubt whether or not the employee would have
been dismissed, this element can be reflected by reducing the normal amount of
compensation by a percentage representing the chance that the employee would still
have lost his employment. Although this inherently involves a degree of speculation,
Tribunals should not shy away from that exercise. Guidance on the approach to be
taken is given by the Employment Appeal Tribunal in paragraph 54 of Software 2000
Limited v Andrews [2007] IRLR 568
The ACAS Code
32. Section 207A of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act
1992 gives the Tribunal a power to adjust compensation where there has been an
unreasonable failure to comply with the ACAS Code of Practice on Disciplinary and
Grievance Procedures (“the ACAS Code”). Compensation can be increased where it
is just and equitable but by no more than 25%.
33. The Tribunal’s discretion under s.207A is very broad, both as to whether there
should be an uplift at all, and as to the amount of any uplift: Slade and anor v Biggs
and ors 2022 IRLR 216. We had regard to the guidance in Slade that the top of the
range of 25% should be applied only to the most serious cases but that the statute
does not state that such cases should necessarily have to be classified, additionally,
as exceptional.
34. In Slade, the EAT suggested that a Tribunal in applying s.207A “might choose
to apply” a four-stage test:
a) Is the case such as to make it just and equitable to award any ACAS uplift?
b) If so, what does the Tribunal consider a just and equitable percentage, not
exceeding although possibly equalling, 25%?
6

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
c) Does the uplift overlap, or potentially overlap, with other general awards,
such as injury to feelings; and, if so, what in the Tribunal's judgment is the appropriate
adjustment, if any, to the percentage of those awards in order to avoid double-
counting?
d) Applying a final sense-check, is the sum of money represented by the
application of the percentage uplift arrived at by the Tribunal disproportionate in
absolute terms and, if so, what further adjustment needs to be made?”
Contributory Fault
35. A reduction because of contributory fault by the employee can apply both to the
basic award and to the compensatory award by virtue of differently worded provisions
in sections 122 and 123 respectively:
“Section 122 (2) Where the tribunal considers that any conduct of the
complainant before the dismissal (or, where the dismissal was with notice,
before the notice was given) was such that it would be just and equitable to
reduce or further reduce the amount of the basic award to any extent, the
tribunal shall reduce or further reduce that amount accordingly….
Section 123 (6) Where the tribunal finds that the dismissal was to any extent
caused or contributed to by any action of the complainant, it shall reduce the
amount of the compensatory award by such proportion as it considers just and
equitable having regard to that finding.”
36. As to what conduct may fall within these provisions, we had regard to the
decision of the Court of Appeal in Nelson v BBC (No 2) [1980] ICR 110 and to Steen
v ASP Packaging Ltd [2014] ICR 56. The focus is on whether the behaviour of the
claimant amounts to “culpable and blameworthy” conduct.
Equality Act 2010 claims
37. S.39 and 40 of the 2010 Act prohibit discrimination, victimisation or harassment
of employees. So far as material to this case they provide as follows:
“39 Employees and applicants
(2) An employer (A) must not discriminate against an employee of A's
(B)—
(a) as to B's terms of employment;
(b) in the way A affords B access, or by not affording B access, to
opportunities for promotion, transfer or training or for receiving
any other benefit, facility or service;
(c) by dismissing B;
(d) by subjecting B to any other detriment.
7

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
(3)….
(4) An employer (A) must not victimise an employee of A's (B)—
(a) as to B's terms of employment;
(b) in the way A affords B access, or by not affording B access, to
opportunities for promotion, transfer or training or for any other
benefit, facility or service;
(c) by dismissing B;
(d) by subjecting B to any other detriment.
(5) ……
40 Employees and applicants: harassment
(1) An employer (A) must not, in relation to employment by A, harass a
person (B)—
(a) who is an employee of A's;
(b) ….
The Burden of Proof
38. The 2010 Act provides for a shifting burden of proof. Section 136 so far as
material provides as follows:
"(2) If there are facts from which the Court could decide in the absence of any
other explanation that a person (A) contravened the provision concerned, the
Court must hold that the contravention occurred.
(3) But subsection (2) does not apply if A shows that A did not contravene
the provision."
39. This means that it is for a claimant to establish facts from which the Tribunal
can reasonably conclude that there has been a contravention of the 2010 Act. If the
claimant establishes those facts, the burden shifts to the respondent to show that there
has been no contravention by, for example, identifying a different reason for the
treatment.
40. As for what is required to discharge the burden at the first stage, that must be
something more than a difference in the relevant protected characteristic and a
difference in treatment; see Madarassy v Nomura International plc [2007] ICR 867,
CA. That said, the something more required at the first stage need not be a great deal;
see Deman v EHRC [2010] EWCA Civ 1279.
8

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
41. A finding that an employer has behaved unreasonably, or treated an employee
badly, will not, however, be sufficient, of itself, to cause the burden of proof to shift;
Glasgow City Council v Zafar [1998] ICR 120.
42. The guidance in in Igen Ltd v Wong [2005] ICR 931, CA states when the
burden has passed, not only must the respondent provide an explanation for the facts
proved by the claimant, from which the inferences could be drawn, but that explanation
must be adequate to prove, on the balance of probabilities, that the protected
characteristic was no part of the reason for the treatment. However, that explanation
need not be “adequate” in the sense of providing a reason which satisfies some
objective standard of reasonableness or acceptability – it does not matter if the
employer has acted for an unfair or discreditable reason provided that the reason had
nothing to do with the protected characteristic (Royal Mail Group v Efobi [2021]
UKSC 33 at para 29).
Discrimination arising from disability (“a s.15 claim”)
43. Section 15 of the 2010 Act states:
(1) A person (A) discriminates against a disabled person (B) if--
(a) A treats B unfavourably because of something arising in
consequence of B's disability, and
(b) A cannot show that the treatment is a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if A shows that A did not know,
and could not reasonably have been expected to know, that B had the
disability.
44. There is a need to identify two separate causative steps in order for a s.15 claim
to be made out (Basildon and Thurrock NHS Foundation Trust v Weerasinghe
2016 ICR 305, EAT):
• the disability had the consequence of ‘something’;
• the claimant was treated unfavourably because of that ‘something’.
45. In Basildon the EAT said it does not matter in which order the tribunal
approaches these two steps: ‘It might ask first what the consequence, result or
outcome of the disability is, in order to answer the question posed by “in consequence
of”, and thus find out what the “something” is, and then proceed to ask if it is “because
of” that that A treated B unfavourably. It might equally ask why it was that A treated B
unfavourably, and having identified that, ask whether that was something that arose
in consequence of B’s disability’.
46. In Pnaiser v NHS England and anor 2016 IRLR 170, EAT, the EAT
summarised the proper approach to establishing causation under S.15:
• First, the tribunal has to identify whether the claimant was treated
unfavourably and by whom.
9

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• It then has to determine what caused that treatment — focusing on the
reason in the mind of the alleged discriminator, possibly requiring
examination of the conscious or unconscious thought processes of that
person, but keeping in mind that the actual motive of the alleged
discriminator in acting as he or she did is irrelevant.
• The tribunal must then determine whether the reason was ‘something
arising in consequence of the claimant’s disability’, which could describe a
range of causal links. This stage of the causation test involves an objective
question and does not depend on the thought processes of the alleged
discriminator.
47. For a s.15 claim to succeed the ‘something arising in consequence of the
disability’ must be part of the employer’s reason for the unfavourable treatment. The
key question is whether the something arising in consequence of the disability
operated on the mind of the alleged discriminator, consciously or unconsciously, to a
significant extent (T-Systems Ltd v Lewis EAT 0042/15). “Significant extent” means
a more than trivial part of the reason for the unfavourable treatment (Sheikholeslami
v The University of Edinburgh [2018] IRLR 1090).
48. A claimant needs only to establish some kind of connection between the
claimant’s disability and the unfavourable treatment. In Hall v Chief Constable of
West Yorkshire Police 2015 IRLR 893, EAT the EAT confirmed that a s.15 claim can
succeed where the something arising has a significant influence on, or was an effective
cause of, the unfavourable treatment. In Sheikholeslami the EAT said that the
connection with the disability may involve more than one link in the chain of
consequences.
49. Mr Boyd in his submissions referred to McQueen v General Optical Council
[2023] EAT 36. In that case the EAT upheld a Tribunal’s decision that the claimant’s
conduct on the occasions when he came into conflict with co-workers was not
something arising in consequence of his disabilities (dyslexia, symptoms of Asperger’s
Syndrome, neurodiversity and left sided hearing loss). The EAT confirmed that once
the Tribunal had made those findings, the question whether any unfavourable
treatment alleged and proved had been “because of” something arising in
consequence of his disabilities did not arise.
50. Para 5.9 of the Equality and Human Rights Commission’s Code of Practice on
Employment (“the EHRC Code”), in answer to the question “what does “something
arising in consequence of a disability” says that:
“The consequences of a disability include anything which is the result, effect or
outcome of a disabled person’s disability. The consequences will be varied, and
will depend on the individual effect upon a disabled person of their disability.
Some consequences may be obvious, such as an inability to walk unaided or
inability to use certain work equipment. Others may not be obvious, for example,
having to follow a restricted diet”.
51. Where an employer dismisses a disabled employee for misconduct caused by
his or her disability, the dismissal can amount to discrimination under S.15 of the 2010
Act even if the employer did not know that the disability caused the misconduct (City
of York Council v Grosset 2018 ICR 1492, CA).
10

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
52. A s.15 claim will only succeed if the employer (or other person against whom
the allegation is made) is unable to show that the unfavourable treatment to which the
claimant has been subjected is objectively justified as a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim.
53. The EHRC Code sets out guidance on objective justification. In summary, the
aim pursued should be legal, should not be discriminatory in itself and must represent
a real, objective consideration. Although business needs and economic efficiency may
be legitimate aims, the EHRC Code states that an employer simply trying to reduce
costs cannot expect to satisfy the test (see para 4.29). As to proportionality, the EHRC
Code notes that the measure adopted by the employer does not have to be the only
possible way of achieving the legitimate aim, but the treatment will not be proportionate
if less discriminatory measures could have been taken to achieve the same objective
(see para 4.31).
54. A failure to make a reasonable adjustment will make it very difficult for the
employer to argue that unfavourable treatment was nonetheless justified. The
converse is not necessarily true. Just because an employer has implemented
reasonable adjustments does not guarantee that unfavourable treatment of the
claimant will be justified, e.g. if the particular adjustment is unrelated to the
unfavourable treatment complained of or only goes part way towards dealing with the
matter.
55. In O'Brien v Bolton St. Catherine's Academy [2017] EWCA Civ 145 the
Court of Appeal said that the tribunal in that case, which had found that the dismissal
in question in that case was in breach of section 15 of the 2010 Act, was also entitled
to conclude from this that it had been an unfair dismissal. In City of York Council v P
J Grosset [2018] EWCA Civ 1105 the Court of Appeal said that Underhill LJ in
O’Brien was addressing his remarks to the particular facts of that case, and was not
seeking to lay down any general proposition that the test under section 15(1)(b) of the
2010 Act and the test for unfair dismissal are the same.
56. This means there is no inconsistency between a Tribunal dismissing a
claimant's claim of unfair dismissal but upholding a claim under section 15 of the 2010
Act in respect of the same dismissal. This is because the test in relation to unfair
dismissal is whether dismissal was within the range of reasonable responses available
to an employer, thereby allowing a significant latitude of judgment for the employer
itself. By contrast, the test under section 15(1)(b) of the 2010 Act is an objective one,
according to which the ET must make its own assessment: see Hardy & Hansons plc
[2005] EWCA Civ 846; [2005] ICR 1565 , [31]-[32], and Chief Constable of West
Yorkshire Police v Homer [2012] UKSC 15.
57. The burden of proof provisions apply to s.15 claims. Based on Pnaiser, in the
context of a S.15 claim, in order to prove a prima facie case of discrimination and shift
the burden to the employer to disprove his or her case, the claimant will need to show:
• that he or she has been subjected to unfavourable treatment
• that he or she is disabled and that the employer had actual or constructive
knowledge of this
11

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• a link between the disability and the ‘something’ that is said to be the ground
for the unfavourable treatment
• some evidence from which it could be inferred that the ‘something’ was the
reason for the treatment.
58. If the prima facie case is established and the burden then shifts, the employer
can defeat the claim by proving either:
• that the reason or reasons for the unfavourable treatment was/were not in
fact the ‘something’ that is relied upon as arising in consequence of the
claimant’s disability, or
• that the treatment, although meted out because of something arising in
consequence of the disability, was justified as a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim.
Disability-related harassment
59. The definition of harassment appears in section 26 of the 2010 Act which so far
as material reads as follows:
“(1) A person (A) harasses another (B) if -
(a) A engages in unwanted conduct related to a relevant
protected characteristic, and
(b) the conduct has the purpose or effect of
(i) violating B’s dignity, or
(ii) creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading,
humiliating or offensive environment for B…
(4) In deciding whether conduct has the effect referred to sub-section
(1)(b), each of the following must be taken into account -
(a) the perception of B;
(b) the other circumstances of the case;
(c) whether it is reasonable for the conduct to have that effect.”
60. The EHRC Code gives more detail on the factors relevant in deciding whether
conduct has the effect referred to in s.26(1)(b) (“a harassing effect”) at paragraph 7.18:
“7.18 In deciding whether conduct had that effect, each of the following must
be taken into account:
a) The perception of the worker; that is, did they regard it as violating their
dignity or creating an intimidating (etc) environment for them. This part of
12

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
the test is a subjective question and depends on how the worker regards
the treatment.
b) The other circumstances of the case; circumstances that may be
relevant and therefore need to be taken into account can include the
personal circumstances of the worker experiencing the conduct; for
example, the worker’s health, including mental health; mental capacity;
cultural norms; or previous experience of harassment; and also the
environment in which the conduct takes place.
c) Whether it is reasonable for the conduct to have that effect; this is an
objective test. A tribunal is unlikely to find unwanted conduct has the effect,
for example, of offending a worker if the tribunal considers the worker to be
hypersensitive and that another person subjected to the same conduct
would not have been offended.”
61. For a complaint of disability-related harassment to succeed, the Tribunal must
be satisfied that there was unwanted conduct which was disability-related and which
had a harassing purpose or a harassing effect. Harassment can occur even if the
conduct did not have a harassing purpose, so long as it had the harassing effect.
62. The test of whether conduct is “related” to a protected characteristic (in this
case disability) is different to that of whether it is “because of” a protected characteristic
which applies in a case of direct discrimination. The term ‘related to” is wider and more
flexible than “because of”. In a disability-related harassment case, conduct could be
found to be “related to” disability where it was done because of disability, but that is
not a requirement. So, for example, if A subjects B to unwanted conduct with the
purpose of “creating an intimidating environment for B” in circumstances in which it is
established that A would not have subjected someone without the disability to the
same conduct, that would establish that the conduct was “related to disability”. But
there are many other ways in which conduct could be “related to disability”. One
example given in a case of race-related harassment is where there is conduct that is
inherently racist such as telling racist jokes (Blanc de Provence Ltd v Ha [2023] EAT
160).
63. Whether conduct is ‘related to’ a protected characteristic is a matter for the
appreciation of the Tribunal, making a finding of fact drawing on all the evidence before
it. The fact that the claimant considers that the conduct is related to that characteristic
is not determinative. There must be still, in any given case, be some feature or features
of the factual matrix identified by the Tribunal, which properly leads it to the conclusion
that the conduct in question is related to the particular characteristic in question, and
in the manner alleged by the claim (Tees Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation
Trust v Aslam and anor 2020 IRLR 495).
64. Case-law has made it clear that the language used in s.26, i.e. "violation of
dignity" and "intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating, or offensive" is significant:
"Tribunals must not cheapen the significance of these words. They are an
important control to prevent trivial acts causing minor upsets being caught
by the concept of harassment." (per Elias LJ in Grant v HM Land Registry
[2011] EWCA Civ 769 at paragraph 47 )
13

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
"The word 'violating' is a strong word. Offending against dignity, hurting it,
is insufficient. 'Violating' may be a word the strength of which is sometimes
overlooked. The same might be said of the words 'intimidating' etc. All look
for effects which are serious and marked, and not those which are, though
real, truly of lesser consequence." (per Langstaff P Betsi Cadwaladr
University v Hughes UKEAT/0179/13 at paragraph 12)”.
Victimisation
65. S.27 of the 2010 Act makes victimisation unlawful:
"(1) A person (A) victimises another person (B) if A subjects B to a
detriment because -
(a) B does a protected act, or
(b) A believes that B has done, or may do, a protected act.
(2) Each of the following is a protected act -
(a) bringing proceedings under this Act;
(b) giving evidence or information in connection with proceedings
under this Act;
(c) doing any other thing for the purposes of or in connection with this
Act;
(d) making an allegation (whether or not express) that A or another
person has contravened this Act.
(3) Giving false evidence or information, or making a false allegation,
is not a protected act if the evidence or information is given, or the
allegation is made, in bad faith."
66. This means that for a victimisation claim to succeed, a claimant has to show
three things. First, that they did a protected act (or that the respondent believed they
had or may do such an act); second, that they were subjected to a detriment; and third
that they were subjected to that detriment because of the protected act.
67. As to the meaning of a protected act in 27(2)(c), the EAT in Kirby v National
Probation Service for England and Wales (Cumbria Area) [2006] IRLR 508
described the equivalent (though differently worded) subsection in Section 2(1)(c) of
the Race Relations Act 1976 as a “catchall” in a case where the alleged “victim” has
otherwise done anything … by reference to this Act in relation to the discriminator” or
any other person.
68. In Kirby the claimant had given information in connection with a complaint of
race discrimination raised in internal grievance proceedings.
69. In Aziz v Trinity Street Taxis Ltd [1988] ICR 534, 542, CA Slade LJ said: “An
act can, in our judgment, properly be said to be done “by reference to the Act” if it is
14

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
done by reference to the race relations legislation in the broad sense, even though the
doer does not focus his mind specifically on any provision of the Act.”
70. In relation to “allegation” in s.27(2)(d), in Beneviste v Kingston University
(UKEAT/0395/05) the EAT said “that there is no need for the allegation to refer to the
legislation, or to allege a contravention, but the gravamen of the allegation must be
such that, if the allegation were proved, the alleged act would be a contravention of
the legislation.”
71. In Fullah v Medical Research Council (UKEAT/0586/12) the EAT held that it
was not necessary, for example, to refer to “race” using that word but that there must
be something sufficient about the complaint to show that it is a complaint to which at
least the Equality Act 2010 potentially applies. In that case, the word “discriminatory”
was used but the tribunal was entitled to find it was used to mean unfair treatment
rather than detrimental action based on a protected characteristic.
72. S.27(1)(a) refers to subjecting to a detriment because of a protected act but
does not refer to “less favourable treatment”. There is therefore no absolute need for
a tribunal to construct an appropriate comparator in victimisation claims. The EHRC
Code at para 9.11 states: ‘The worker need only show that they have experienced a
detriment because they have done a protected act or because the employer believes
(rightly or wrongly) that they have done or intend to do a protected act’.
73. The question in any claim of victimisation is what was the 'reason' that the
respondent did the act complained of: if it was, wholly or in substantial part, that the
claimant had done a protected act (or that they believed the claimant had or may do
such an act), the employer is liable for victimisation; and if not, not.
74. The protected act need not be the only reason for the detrimental treatment. It
is sufficient that the protected act has a “significant influence” on the decision to act in
the manner complained of (Nagarajan v London Regional Transport [1999] IRLR
572). For an influence to be “significant” it must be “an influence which is more than
trivial” (Igen Ltd Wong [2005] ICR 931, CA). In Villalba v Merrill Lynch and Co Inc
and ors [2007] ICR 469, the EAT held "if in relation to any particular decision a
discriminatory influence is not a material influence or factor, then in our view it is trivial".
Separability of the protected act from the manner of doing it
75. There will in principle be cases where an employer has subjected an employee
to a detriment in response to the doing of a protected act but where it can, as a matter
of common sense and common justice, say that the reason for the detriment was not
the complaint as such but some other genuinely separable feature of the complaint
(such as the unreasonable or offensive manner in which it is made) (Martin v
Devonshires Solicitors [2011] ICR 352.
76. In Martin [para 22], the EAT acknowledged that it would be contrary to the
policy of the anti-victimisation provisions if employers were able to take steps against
employees simply because in making a complaint they had say, used intemperate
language or made inaccurate statements. An employer who purports to object to
“ordinary” unreasonable behaviour of that kind should be treated as objecting to the
15

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
complaint itself. Tribunals should be slow to recognise a distinction between the
complaint and the way it is made save in clear cases.
77. In the Court of Appeal in Kong v Gulf International Bank (UK) Ltd 2022
EWCA Civ 941, CA, at para 58, (a whistleblowing case) Underhil LJ, revisiting his
judgment in Martin confirmed that Martin does not establish a rule of law that so long
as there is no more than “ordinary” unreasonable behaviour by the person doing a
protected act any detriment will be treated as being because of that act. There is no
objective standard against which behaviour must be assessed to determine whether
the separability principle applies in a particular case, nor any question of requiring
behaviour to reach a particular threshold of seriousness before that behaviour or
conduct can be distinguished as separable from the making of the protected disclosure
itself.
78. The key question is one of fact, i.e. what were the reasons for any detrimental
treatment. Once the reasons have been identified, the Tribunal must evaluate whether
the reasons so identified are separate from the protected disclosure, or whether they
are so closely connected with it that a distinction cannot fairly and sensibly be drawn.
Were this exercise not permissible, the effect would be that whistle-blowers would
have immunity for behaviour or conduct related to the making of a protected disclosure
no matter how bad, and employers would be obliged to ensure that they are not
adversely treated, again no matter how bad the associated behaviour or conduct.
79. In Fecitt and others v NHS Manchester [2011] EWCA Civ 1190, [2012] ICR
372, (a whistleblowing case cited in Kong) Elias LJ said in the Court of Appeal that
where the whistleblower is subject to a detriment without being at fault in any way, the
Tribunal will need to look with a critical - indeed sceptical - eye to see whether the
innocent explanation given by the employer for the adverse treatment is indeed the
genuine explanation. The detrimental treatment of an innocent whistle-blower
necessarily provides a strong prima facie case that the action has been taken because
of the protected disclosure and it cries out for an explanation from the employer.
80. That does not mean, however, that in the case of such an innocent
whistleblower there could be no explanation which the employer could offer in these
circumstances which would relieve him from liability. In Fecitt, that meant that the
“need to resolve a difficult and dysfunctional situation could provide a lawful
explanation for imposing detrimental treatment on an innocent whistleblower.”.
Evidence
81. There was an agreed bundle consisting of 1,410 pages. During the hearing
further pages (1411-1416) were added to the Bundle without any objection.
82. Dr Ruthenberg’s “Expert Witness Report” was dated 7 August 2023. It was
prepared for the purposes of these proceedings. It was not a joint expert report. He
had been instructed by the claimant’s solicitors, rather than jointly by both parties.
However, the respondent had had an opportunity to ask written questions on the
report. Dr Ruthenberg had responded to those in an Addendum Report dated 5 July
2024 (pp.1363-1373).
83. Each of the witnesses had provided a written witness statement
16

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
84. The claimant gave oral evidence in support of his case. He was cross-examined
by Mr Boyd, answered questions from the Tribunal and was re-examined by Ms
Dinnes.
85. For the respondent, we heard from the following witnesses:
• On day 5, Richard Cornwell, at the relevant time the respondent’s managing
director (“Mr Cornwell”).
• On the morning of day 6, Emma Deakin, at the relevant time the respondent’s
Sales and Marketing Director (“Mrs Deakin”)
• On the afternoon of day 6, Eleri Jones, an HR Consultant engaged by the
respondent in November 2021 (“Ms Jones”).
• On Day 7, Jens Marquard, Senior Vice President/Regional Director Eastern and
Northern Europe for Hartmann Group (“Mr Marquard”).
• On the morning of day 8, Maximilian d’Huc, Senior Vice President - Human
Resources Management for the Hartmann Group (“Mr d’Huc”).
• On the afternoon of day 8, Trevor Coupe, the respondent‘s Finance Director
(“Mr Coupe”).
• On the morning of day 9 and the morning of day 10, Abid Al-Qasmi, the
respondent’s Head of HR, UK and Ireland (“Mr Al-Qasmi”).
86. Each of the respondent’s witnesses was cross-examined by Ms Dinnes,
answered the Tribunal’s questions and was re-examined by Mr Boyd.
Findings of Fact
87. We set out below our findings of fact based on the evidence we heard and read
and taking into account the parties’ submissions on that evidence.
88. Issues about how the claimant communicated with others are central to
deciding the issues in this case. As a result, we have found it necessary to make more
detailed findings than usual about what was said or written between the individuals
concerned.
Background
The claimant and his role
89. The respondent is a supplier of wound, continence and disinfection products. It
is an UK company. It is part of the Hartmann Group of companies (“the Group”), a
worldwide group of companies which has its headquarters in Germany.
90. The claimant excels at computer programming and has done so from a young
age. He started working as a Programmer for his father’s company in 1998. He
became a Senior Programmer and then Site IT Manager from 2001. The vast majority
of that work was done for the respondent. In 2006 the respondent brought that work
in-house and the claimant TUPE transferred over to the respondent as IT Manager.
17

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
91. From February 2013 the claimant was promoted to IT Solutions Architect. That
was a Grade 6 role. He reported to Mr Coupe. The claimant managed the respondent’s
IT team, line managing the members of that UK team. At that point and until late 2019
there were equivalent “local” IT teams in other countries where there were Group
companies. Each local IT Team had their own IT lead. There was also a central Group
IT team.
92. We find that from at least 2015 onwards the claimant became increasingly
frustrated by what he saw as a lack of recognition of his contribution to the business.
The Group had in 2015 identified him as one potential long term (2+ years) successor
for the role of Vice President of IT for the Group (p.187). More specifically, we find that
from 2015 the claimant was increasingly frustrated that that contribution had not been
recognised by promoting him to the role of IT Director at Grade 7.
93. Dr Ruthenberg in his Expert Witness Report said that it was clear that the
claimant felt that “his performance and achievements were not sufficiently
acknowledged or appreciated by Mr Cornwell” and that “[the claimant] never accepted
the argument that his not becoming an IT Director was owing to the post not being
available in the UK subsidiary. He was of the view that had he been fully appreciated
such a post may have been actively worked towards by senior management.” Dr
Ruthenberg’s view was that the claimant’s perception that the request was not taken
seriously, even if implausible to implement, was experienced by the claimant as him
“being fobbed off and not appreciated and became rigidly set in his mind-set as
prejudice owing to his autism”.
The management structure of the respondent and the Group.
94. Mr Cornwell joined the respondent as Managing Director in January 2017,
replacing Olaf Heinzel (“Mr Heinzel”).
95. At that point there was an executive leadership team consisting of the sales and
marketing heads, the Finance Director (Mr Coupe) and Head of HR (Mr Al-Qasmi).
They reported directly to the Managing Director. There was a second tier of senior
managers consisting of the head of supply chain, the contracts manager and the
claimant. They reported to Mr Coupe. One of Mr Heinzel’s last acts before leaving was
to create that second tier. The claimant viewed that as Mr Heinzel effectively
“demoting” him from the executive leadership team. He wanted to report directly to the
MD rather than to Mr Coupe, the Finance Director.
96. Within 3 months of his appointment Mr Cornwell decided that the senior
managers in that “second tier” should be part of one senior management team
(“SMT”). As the claimant acknowledged, that meant Mr Cornwell restored him to the
respondent’s executive leadership team. The claimant was a member of SMT from
2017 until his employment ended. At that point, however, he continued to report to Mr
Coupe rather than Mr Cornwell. That was also the case for the contracts and supply
chain managers.
97. Mrs Deakin joined the respondent in July 2018 as Marketing Director and was
appointed to the role of Sales and Marketing Director from December 2020. She was
also a member of the SMT. In January 2021 she became a statutory director of the
respondent alongside Mr Cornwell, Mr Coupe and Marc Perez (Mr Perez”) the
respondent’s chairman.
18

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
98. Mr Marquard’s role as Senior Vice President/Regional Director meant he was
in effect the regional managing director, responsible for the financial performance of
each country within his region, Region 3. The managing directors of each country
within his region reported to him. From Summer 2021 his region included UK and
Ireland which meant Mr Cornwell reported to him. Mr Marquard in turn reported to
Francois Georgelin, who was a member of the Group’s Management Board.
99. Mr D’Huc was Global Head of HR for the Group. The HR structure in the Group
mirrored the management structure. There was a Head of HR for Region 3. Mr Al-
Qasmi reported to them and they reported to Mr d’Huc. Mr d’Huc in turn reported to
Britta Fuenfstueck (“Ms Fuenfstueck”), the Group’s CEO.
The claimant’s autism diagnosis
100. In October 2015 the claimant was diagnosed as an autistic person. He
confirmed his formal diagnosis with Asperger’s Syndrome to Mr Coupe in an email on
6 October 2015. He reported that he was “high functioning, deliberately compensating
for most ‘normal’ activities”. He said he did not want to make a big deal but suggested
sharing the diagnosis with a small group of people along with some education might
be beneficial (p.189)
101. The claimant shared his diagnosis with Mr Cornwell’s predecessor as MD of
the respondent, Mr Heinzel, in November 2015. He had shared it with Mr Cornwell by
May 2017. The claimant did not share his diagnosis with the wider management team
at that point. The claimant believed that Mr Heinzel had shared information about his
diagnosis with a previous director without the claimant’s consent. There was no
evidence that Mr Coupe or Mr Cornwell had done so. We find Mr Al-Qasmi was not
made aware of it until 4 December 2017.
Events from December 2017 to January 2018 - the “2018 Target issue” and the
Claimant’s “Request for Employee Support”
December 2017 – “the 2018 Target issue”
102. At the start of December 2017 there was an exchange of emails between the
claimant and Mr Cornwell about targets and bonuses for 2018. Mr Cornwell had
emailed the respondent’s executive leadership team on 30 November 2017 about the
need for targets to be SMART. He told them that their targets for 2018 were to be split
50/50 between a Business Target and Individual Targets. The Business Target was
based on the respondent’s EBIT (earnings before interest and taxes) for 2018. 20% of
the Individual Targets were to be based on the respondent’s sales in 2018 with the
remaining 30% to be targets linked to their specific roles.
103. We find the claimant was very concerned about this. He felt he had in the past
been “diverted” into accepting higher bonus percentages instead of basic salary rises.
He viewed the changes to targets as a radical change with the potential to significantly
impact on his bonus. He emailed Mr Cornwell on 2 December to query whether the
proposed targets applied to him. Mr Cornwell confirmed by return email that the rules
applied to everyone (p.195).
104. The claimant responded with a longer email setting out his concerns about his
bonus depending to such an extent on sales and EBIT (earnings before interest and
19

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
taxes). He said he viewed the proposals as unfair because he was not in a position to
influence EBIT and sales in the way that others, including Mr Cornwell, were. He noted
that there seemed to have been special arrangements for others when it came to their
incentives and asked for a consultation on tailoring his incentives. He said that was “to
avoid discrimination and find a structure that is suitable for me that will incentivise me
to complete tasks I can actually influence, as should be the nature of a bonus scheme.”
He asked Mr Cornwell to consider his points and closed his email by saying that “If
these points are of no importance to you at least we can understand each other
position very clearly”.
105. Mr Cornwell responded on the same day. He told the claimant that they would
discuss the matter the following week but that “your push back on every single item I
discuss with you is beginning to get tiresome” (p.194). He pointed out that he set
targets to drive the business in the right direction, not to benefit individual employees.
He pointed out that the claimant would have earned more bonus in 2017 had he had
agreed to a 2017 target based 50% on EBIT.
106. The claimant responded 15 minutes later to challenge Mr Cornwell’s use of the
word “tiresome”. He said that they needed to talk again to “reset for all our benefits”.
He said he did not challenge Mr Cornwell’s authority, only the logicality of decision
making. He would always comply if the decision was final. He said he had explained
to Mr Cornwell in detail his thought patterns and diagnosis and they both knew why
this was his nature. He asked whether Mr Cornwell was really inviting him to do a
session in front of the management team on neurodiversity when Mr Cornwell
considered the claimant, who was (in the claimant’s words) “a top performer in his
company who happens to be on the autistic spectrum?!” to be “tiresome”. He said
there was “nothing wrong in employment in politely questioning the logic of decisions
but everything wrong with an intolerant attitude”.
107. The exchange of emails continued that afternoon. Mr Cornwell reiterated they
would discuss the following week. The discussion would include the importance of the
whole leadership team being focussed on EBIT and sales, regardless of functional
role. The claimant responded by telling Mr Cornwell that he was feeling extremely
stressed as a result of his email. He said he had never been told he was “tiresome”
before and had always been treated with dignity by Mr Cornwell’s predecessors both
before and after his ASD diagnosis became known to them.
108. Mr Cornwell forwarded the email exchange to Mr Coupe and Mr Al-Qasmi on
the same day suggesting they discuss the following week. In his forwarding email (not
copied to the claimant) he made it clear the claimant would need to “change his attitude
and could not complain each time he felt financially out of pocket”. It was not, he said,
acceptable for a senior manager to reject EBIT as a target. Mr Cornwell said that if his
choice of words was wrong, he would take responsibility for that. There was nothing
in that forwarding email to suggest that Mr Cornwell took issue with the claimant’s
manner of communication being “direct or “overinclusive”.
4 December 2017 – the claimant’s request for “Employee Support”
109. On the morning of 4 December 2017, the claimant emailed Mr Cornwell and Mr
Coupe a request for “Employee Support”. He requested 2 things. The first was a
“package of assistance” to include a formal assessment of how his disability affected
him and how the respondent could support him in the workplace. The second was a
20

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
“documented retrospective review whether there had been any intentional or
unintended discrimination with regards to [his] career path progression both pre and
post diagnosis.”
110. The claimant said that in his opinion equivalent activities should already have
been carried out. He said he could provide many inputs into the exercise and that he
“would expect it to be highly consultative”. He said that autism was highly nuanced
and far reaching in its effect and research and external expertise would also be
needed. He ended his email by stating his belief that if these exercises were completed
thoroughly, it would provide a tool kit for “minimising the risk of discrimination for and
future employees with [his] condition and be in the best interest of both individuals and
[the Group]”.
111. We find that Mr Cornwell’s “tiresome” comment had triggered a belief on the
claimant’s part that his career progression had been impacted by discrimination
related to his being an autistic person.
112. Mr Cornwell responded the same day to say he was happy to discuss the
claimant’s request. Noting that the claimant had in the past asked that his diagnosis
was not discussed with Mr Al-Qasmi, he asked for the claimant’s permission to do so
because of the need to involve him. The claimant gave permission by return email
(p.202). We accept Mr Al-Qasmi’s evidence that it was on the 4 December 2017 he
first became aware of the claimant’s autism diagnosis.
113. The same day, having taken legal advice, Mr Al-Qasmi advised Mr Coupe that
the respondent should arrange an Occupational Health (“OH”) appointment to try and
better understand the claimant’s condition and identify possible reasonable
adjustments. He also advised the claimant’s email should be treated as a grievance.
114. Mr Cornwell responded by email to Mr Al-Qasmi and Mr Coupe the same day
to say he was “really not sure” on what grounds [the claimant] was judging that there
was any discrimination. He set out his view of the facts as he saw them. That was that
if anything the respondent had positively discriminated in the claimant’s favour. He had
been promoted to the SMT and had a clear line of communication with Mr Cornwell.
He had been awarded overtime for work on a server upgrade overnight despite the
urgency for that upgrade being due to a blockage of the claimant’s own making in Mr
Cornwell’s view. He had also been awarded an extraordinary bonus for work on a
software project. The claimant was allowed to work from home when he saw fit and
had been given a new office with windows. Mr Cornwell said he had also gone on
record thanking the claimant for his work on the software project. He reiterated that
the claimant’s 2018 bonus, with its focus on EBIT, was fully aligned to his peer group
and aimed to help the team to understand that requests for expensive IT equipment,
significant pay rises and high end business skills training all had a major impact on the
respondent’s bottom line. (p.199)
115. On 8 December 2017 the claimant emailed Mr Al-Qasmi asking to see the
complete information on his personnel file. He also asked for comprehensive details
of the sources, purposes for processing and of the disclosure of any data relating to
him together with an explanation of how any decisions taken about him solely by
automated means had been made (P.205). The request was treated as a data subject
access request and processed after the claimant had paid the £10 fee requested of
him.
21

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
January 2018 to 10 May 2018 – seeking an OH Assessment and the claimant’s
informal grievance
Sourcing an OH assessment
116. In December 2017 the respondent had taken steps set up an OH assessment
of the claimant through its preferred OH provider, Medigold. An appointment was
arranged for 2 January 2018 but cancelled. The cancellation was partly because the
claimant was not satisfied that the OH assessment would be carried out by someone
sufficiently specialised in autism. The other reason was that he had found Medigold
staff unprofessional and unsatisfactory in their communications with him, to the extent
that he had lodged a formal complaint with its Chief Executive (p.206). On 20
December 2017 Medigold wrote to the respondent and claimant to recommend that
the claimant be seen by a consultant in autism rather than an OH physician.
117. By 8 January 2018 the claimant had received and reviewed his personnel file.
He emailed Mr Al-Qasmi, Mr Cornwell and Mr Coupe to say that in doing so he had
found evidence of “continuing unintentional discrimination” which had delayed his
career development in the Group (p.211). He referred specifically to an incident in
2013 when he had communicated his views about the failings of the Group’s Central
IT team to the then CEO in direct terms. The CEO had reacted negatively. The
claimant’s belief was that that incident had affected his standing in the Group and led
to his influence and status at local level “waning” between 2013-2016. That included
being “shut out” of the UK executive team (a reference, we find to what he perceived
as his “demotion” by Mr Heinzel). He acknowledged that Mr Cornwell had done
something to rectify that already but maintained that his career had been set back.
118. The claimant asserted his career was still set back from where it should be and
he “had no evidence that the incident in 2013 has not affected my standing in the
Group”. We find it was a feature of the claimant’s communications from this point that
he attributed what he saw as his lack of career progression or pay/bonus rises to
discrimination due to his autism in the absence of evidence to prove otherwise.
119. He said he could also not be sure that his ongoing, sometimes direct
communication style was not viewed as challenging by “other career influencing
individuals in the Group” when it was “well-meaning with a goal of group success”. He
referred to other historical factors in the Group which he said still had residual effects,
He cited a lack of diversity training including on disability, a toxic culture from Central
IT with poor treatment of country colleagues, flawed matrix team management and
little support from central management in meeting conflicting goals and competing
resources. He also referred to ambiguous communication messages – on the one
hand being told to be open and challenge but on the other hand it being made clear
“don’t’ get out of your place or else”.
120. The claimant proposed an informal (but minuted) discussion between him, Mr
Al-Qasmi, Mr Cornwell and Mr Coupe on how to “maximise [his] potential despite
personal challenges and minimise the risk of ongoing discrimination in the group or
local company”.
121. Mr Al-Qasmi responded the same day to suggest they meet after the OH
assessment had taken place. Because there was then a delay in sourcing a suitable
OH assessment, Mr Al-Qasmi wrote on 30 January 2018 to ask whether the claimant
22

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
wanted to meet up before the OH assessment took place. The claimant confirmed he
was happy to wait for the OH assessment. He suggested that in the worst-case
scenario, he could create his own document explaining the support he needed from
his perspective and “retrospective challenges”.
Search for a specialist OH Assessment
122. From January to April 2018, the respondent’s HR team worked with the
claimant to find someone to carry out the proposed OH assessment. The claimant
insisted that whoever carried out the OH assessment had the same level of expertise
in autism as the specialist who had diagnosed him. We find the difficulty was finding
someone with that level of specialism who also carried out OH assessments.
123. Medigold had suggested a specialist autism centre (the Tuke Centre) but it
advised it did not have an Occupational Therapist. It suggested contacting the
National Autistic Society. Ms Johnson of the respondent’s HR team tried to contact
the Society a number of times without success. Mr Al-Qasmi also contacted an
organisation called Clinical Partners but they did not have anyone with the specialist
knowledge required to carry out such an OH assessment.
124. The respondent also spoke to BUPA. It assured the respondent that all its OH
physicians were medically qualified with a minimum of 5 years’ experience in
occupational medicine. It confirmed they would be able to recommend any
reasonable adjustments required in the workplace. On 16 April 2018 Ms Johnson
wrote to the claimant to confirm that an appointment had been made for him with
BUPA on 15 May 2018.
125. The claimant raised concerns that the BUPA assessor would be a generalist,
rather than someone specialising in autism. On 17 April he emailed to say he did not
feel it would be beneficial for him to end up “educating a generalist OH about the
condition and them making notes”. He said that unless they got a specialist involved,
he might as well do a written statement derived from his diagnosis notes and discuss
that direct with HR to identify and agree reasonable adaptations (p.217).
126. Ms Johnson emailed back the same day to say that despite the respondent’s
best efforts they had not managed to find an OH provider which met the claimant’s
requirements for a specialist. She made it clear that it was ultimately up to him
whether he went ahead with the BUPA appointment. Later that day the claimant
confirmed he would decline the BUPA appointment.
127. We find the claimant was frustrated by what he saw as the respondent having
given up the search for a specialist too easily. We find the respondent’s view was
that it had taken reasonable steps to find an OH Assessor meeting the claimant’s
requirements.
The 24 April 2018 informal grievance
128. A meeting was due to take place on 30 April 2018 between the claimant, Mr
Cornwell, Mr Coupe and Mr Al-Qasmi. On 24 April 2018, the claimant emailed Mr Al-
Qasmi, Mr Cornwell and Mr Coupe to say that in view of that approaching discussion
he wanted to “formalise this into a grievance”.
23

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
129. In the email he said he had been passed over for promotion, career
development and the subsequent rewards because of “his condition”. No documented
consideration had been given to his request for promotion to IT director while his peers
and newcomers had achieved the role of director in the respondent. He noted their
combined failure so far to source a specialised OH assessor but said he felt this was
still the best course of action. They should keep trying. He would help but it was
primarily the respondent’s role to source such a specialist.
130. He explained that he was raising the grievance because he did not want the
topic to drag on for years. He was happy to explain in person or in writing his
perspective on how his condition affected his interaction with others and what
adaptations were needed, subject to further clarification when the OH assessment was
complete.
131. The claimant’s stated aim was to “arrive at a clear statement that said either:
• We recognise your contribution and the fact that you may have been
discriminated against previously, but we now understand your
condition better and can accommodate it and would like to promote
you to a IT Director
• As above, but if you achieve x,y,z you will be promoted to an IT
Director in this timescale, x,y,z- being achievable reasonable goals,
sufficiently resourced.
• You will never achieve a IT Director position at Hartmann UK because
of x,y,z - being tested reasons that will stand to scrutiny and not just
group culture or norms”
132. We find that underlying the claimant’s position was the already fixed conviction
that the only realistic explanation was that his career (and pay) would have progressed
further had he not been subjected to discrimination. Even his third option, which did
not explicitly refer to past discrimination, effectively put the burden on the respondent
if disprove the discrimination as the reason the claimant would not progress.
133. Mr Al-Qasmi responded the same day to say he understood the claimant to be
raising a formal grievance. He confirmed it would be heard by Mr Coupe at 3:30 pm
on the 30 April and that the claimant was entitled to be accompanied at that meeting.
He confirmed he would also be present. If the claimant objected to Mr Coupe chairing
the meeting he must state his reasons as soon as possible and in writing to Mr. Al-
Qasmi. If the respondent accepted the claimant’s reasons for objecting to Mr. Coupe
a replacement chair might be nominated (Mr Al-Qasmi suggested the then Sales
Director, Mr Rees).
134. Mr Al-Qasmi said the respondent was entitled to make a decision about who it
instructed as an OH provider, subject to considering any suggestion that the claimant
put forward. He noted the claimant had recently cancelled the appointment with BUPA
and suggested it was in both their interests that he attend an OH appointment. He
confirmed that if the claimant wished they could set up an appointment with Medigold
or BUPA. Otherwise, the respondent could only proceed and take decisions based on
the limited information they had. As a final attempt to better understand the claimant's
condition and how he could be supported in he workplace he suggested that they write
24

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
to the specialist who diagnosed the claimant. He asked the claimant to let him know if
it would be useful to explore that option (p.233)
135. The claimant responded to say that Mr Al-Qasmi had misinterpreted his email
and was “jumping the gun”. He was not yet wanting to raise a formal grievance. He
suggested it was “perhaps best to talk before coming to such conclusions”. He
explained that he was instead wanting to raise an informal grievance under the formal
grievance procedure. His view was that to dive into a formal procedure without an OH
assessment would be a mistake. He said that the respondent had not taken up his
offer to explain his condition and needs in a statement. He said that as an alternative
he could contact the clinician and organisation who completed his diagnosis.
136. Mr Al-Qasmi forwarded that e-mail to Mr Cornwell and Mr Coupe. Mr Cornwell
responded saying that Mr Al-Qasmi had not “jumped the gun” because the claimant
had clearly said he wanted to formalise his grievance. Mr Cornwell said that the way
the claimant spoke to Mr Al-Qasmi and his lack of respect was “noted and will be dealt
with as part of his overall process”.
137. On 25 April 2018 Mr Al-Qasmi emailed the claimant to confirm the meeting with
Mr Coupe on the 30 April would remain as an informal grievance meeting and would
take place in Mr. Al-Qasmi's office. He confirmed that in the absence of an OH report
it would be helpful for the claimant to provide a statement giving an insight into his
condition and suggesting any workplace adjustments they could consider as his
employer.
138. He also agreed it would be useful if the claimant provided him with the contact
details of the clinician and organisation which had diagnosed his autism. The claimant
did so but when Mr Al-Qasmi approached them, they were unable to provide an OH
service and were not aware of any OH specialising in autism. Mr Al-Qasmi emailed
the claimant that in those circumstances, there was nothing more the respondent could
do in terms of OH, unless the claimant was now happy to agree to an assessment with
an OH physician from BUPA or Medigold. The claimant said he was “not prepared to
give up so easily” and that he would find a specialist OH.
139. In the meantime, the claimant emailed Mr Al-Qasmi that he wanted Mr Cornwell
to attend the meeting on 30 April as originally planned. He explained he had had
detailed discussions with Mr Cornwell about his career development and diagnosis
and felt that at times he and Mr Cornwell had misunderstood each other. He felt that
was mainly due to neurological differences and approach. He believed Mr Cornwell’s
presence would save time in toing and froing after the meeting and be more likely to
result in the clarity which he was seeking.
140. Mr Al-Qasmi confirmed that Mr Cornwell would not be attending the meeting.
That was because it was best for him to remain neutral in case the claimant wanted to
raise a formal grievance later. The claimant did not think that was the right decision
but agreed to meet.
141. On 25 April 2018 the claimant emailed a personal statement to Mr Al-Qasmi,
Mr Coupe and Mr Cornwell. In it he set out how his neurodiversity affected him at work
and what adaptations could be made. He made it clear that it did not replace a
specialised OH statement but was a resource that could be used in the meantime to
support him and to understand historically his career development.
25

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
142. He said that over the years compensated for the challenges he faced by
consciously asking himself “what would a normal person do here?”. Post-diagnosis he
said he was much better equipped with an understanding of his condition and the
variances between neurotypical and non-neurotypical behaviour. However,
compensating in that way was mentally draining. He said that over the years
flashpoints had occurred when the claimant had not always been able to mask his
differences. He said those differences could now be understood. He stressed the
positives of his neurological makeup and said that in the future with the right levels of
influence and seniority he would bring his strategic input into a new wave of IT
technology working with OneIT.
143. Over the next 4 pages of the statement he set out in tabular form a description
of the challenges he faced and the suggested adaptations. In summary, those
adaptations were an increased awareness of neurodiversity via sourced training, an
increased understanding of the claimant’s actions and behaviours in the context of the
challenges he faced and a recognition if unfair advantage had been given to those
who displayed neurotypical behaviour. The claimant grouped the descriptions and
suggested adaptations under 9 headings. They were: communication style; reactions
to change; social cues; social situations; neurological differences; burnout and
overwork; anxiety and stress; environment and learning and development. He also
included a page of links and resources on neurodiversity available on the Internet.
144. Among the key concerns highlighted were management being offended and
shutting down challenge. The claimant explained that it was extremely stressful for him
not to speak out if he perceived a wrong, injustice or inefficiency. He also needed
clarity. His communication style could be direct. Those, combined with a difficulty
anticipating social cues (including others’ emotional needs unless voiced) could give
rise to offence. He said he was also less aware of unwritten rules or protocols,
especially in a social situation with a high-power differential, e.g. when he was dealing
with superiors. One adaptation was for management to be aware of those matters and
not to take offence but accept challenge at times as “an opportunity”. He suggested
help with communications or pointing out a possible other approach but with “tolerance
of different styles not blunting or silencing necessary points made or removing
autonomy”. He also suggested evaluating whether those who were good at social
situations and “toeing the line without question or using lateral thought” had been
unfairly advantaged. We find that again reflected the claimant’s conviction that the
reason for what he saw as his career progression having been hampered was
discrimination arising from his autism (p.222-227).
145. On 28 April the claimant emailed Mr Al-Qasmi, Mr Coupe and Mr Cornwell
about the meeting on 30 April. He attached to it a document setting out what he
referred to as a more descriptive explanation of his grievance. In his email he set out
points to be taken into account for the best outcome. They included noting that his
communication style might be affected by autism so that he may appear uncomfortable
at times or refer to his notes so he could be coherent and confident in his approach.
He also said he would prefer the meeting to take place in his office because it offered
more privacy and because it was a familiar environment for him. That would also, he
said, avoid the feeling that he had of being “summoned” to Mr. Al-Qasmi’s office.
146. Lastly, he said he was somewhat uncomfortable that some of the points may
appear to criticise both HR processes and Mr Coupe line management. He explained
26

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
that was one reason why he had wanted Mr Cornwell to attend. The 3 of them were
now aware of his condition and he felt that would increase the chances of the informal
meeting being a success. If Mr Cornwell attended as it would remove some of these
feelings of uncomfortableness.
147. Finally, he said that after “15 minutes of Googling and a phone call” he had
found a specialist agency dealing with autism assessment in the workplace, called
Aspiedent. He was awaiting confirmation they could undertake the necessary
specialist OH assessment. If they were not an option, he was happy to keep searching.
In the meantime, the respondent had his personal statement which he recommended
they read fully before the meeting and asked any questions necessary.
148. The grievance meeting took place on 30 April 2018. As the claimant had
requested, it took place in the claimant’s office (p.237). There were no notes of the
meeting in the Bundle and we heard no direct evidence about it. Based on the outcome
letter and other documents we find that during early May 2018 Mr Coupe and Mr Al-
Qasmi carried out an investigation. They spoke to current and senior management in
the Group (including the former UK MD, Mr Heinzel on 9 May 2018).
Events during the claimant’s absence due to stress 10 May to 11 June 2018
149. The claimant was signed off work for 4 weeks from 10 May to 8 June 2018 due
to stress at work.
150. By that time, the Group was implementing a re-organisation of its IT function.
The reorganisation created a centralised IT function called OneIT, bringing together
the IT function across the Group. The intention was that IT employees would report to
their OneIT manager on functional matters rather than their in-country line manager.
The claimant had already had discussions with Sinanudin Omerhodzic (“Mr
Omerhodzic”), Group Senior Vice President of IT, about the claimant’s potential place
and role in the OneIT matrix.
Mr Cornwell and then the claimant contacting Mr Omerhodzic
151. On 11 May 2018 Mr Cornwell emailed Mr Coupe and Mr Al-Qasmi to say that
there were obvious concerns that the claimant’s demeanour, communication style and
behaviours were sometimes viewed in a negative way amongst senior management
in the Group including members of the board. Those concerns appear to have arisen
from Mr Coupe’s investigation meeting with Mr Omerhodzic that morning. Mr Cornwell
said he would contact Mr Omerhodzic to discuss the claimant’s medical condition and
to have an open but confidential conversation such that allowances could be made for
what he described as the claimant’s “out of what we would consider ‘normal’
behaviour” (p. 247).
152. Before he returned to work after his sickness absence, the claimant himself
contacted Mr Omerhodzic. On 9 June 2018 he sent him a document marked as
confidential setting out “Blockers to full participation in OneIT”. He attached the
personal statement which he had prepared for the informal grievance hearing on the
30th of April.
153. The 9 June document refers to a discussion they had had on the previous day
during which the claimant had disclosed his diagnosis of autism. The claimant
27

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
confirmed that the document and the disclosure of disability were confidential. Mr
Omerhodzic could discuss the implications and key points with Mr Cornwell, Mr Coupe
and, if necessary, Mr Heinzel, since they were already aware of the diagnosis. The
claimant might be open to further disclosure to board members or Group HR if Mr
Omerhodzic felt that was useful.
154. The claimant referred to their discussion about the discrimination he had met in
the UK. Mr Omerhodzic had asked what would be needed to resolve those issues and
move forward. He had also said that he would hold open the technical senior
management position in the OneIT matrix during his illness. The claimant confirmed
that he hoped to resume that role after his illness.
155. The claimant identified 3 things as necessary to for him to succeed in his career
and to maximise his contribution to OneIT and the Group. They were about ensuring
that the claimant had the correct position, authority and level of influence in the UK to
support wider OneIT goals with the correct support for his condition. Specifically:
• Direct reporting to the Managing Director rather the Finance Director. That was
partly about Mr Coupe and partly about the role. The claimant said that he had
lost confidence in Mr Coupe’s impartiality, objectivity and ability to represent his
interests. He also believed that the future importance of IT for the Group and
the changes needed to operate as OneIT needed a global, technically enabled
vision and that that was “beyond Mr Coupe”. Instead, it was “[the claimant’s]
domain”. He did not feel he should have to continually justify dividing his team's
attention between global and local projects to a Finance Director but should
instead have autonomy and command of IT resources to enable such
participation and flexibility.
• A local title change to IT Director. That should be accompanied by a secondary
title when referenced in a Group context, reflecting the technical senior
manager role in OneIT. He said promotion to a non-statutory IT director role
represented the appropriate level of seniority in a company with a significant
technology dependency. It was also important to represent IT amongst UK
board peers such as the Sales and Marketing Directors. He warned that “any
status quo within the Group not to have IT directors would be fundamentally
challenged in his grievance as discriminatory”. He said that neither Mr Heinzel
nor Mr Cornwell had outright rejected the suggestion nor given him clarity about
the reasons for not promoting him to IT Director. He said that he had evidence
that linked that to his disability because he had “been considered perhaps
challenging, tiresome or difficult.”
• An agreed strategy to minimise the risk of misunderstanding his condition in
future and “rectifying previous damage”. He referred to the flashpoints that he
had had in the past with senior management including the incident in 2013. Now
that he had his diagnosis and understood himself better, he said that others
should be trained on the implications of neurodiversity and any damage to his
career should be rectified with that understanding wisdom no problem.
156. The claimant closed the document by saying in bold that:
”As I have already said to [Mr Coupe], [Mr Cornwell] and HR, there are
2 ways this could end, one could be a bright light and good story on
28

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
inclusiveness with disability and IT reflected on the UK board, one
could be a shameful outcome with a high award for injury and very
bad publicity to an esteemed global group and its management. This
all depends on reasonableness of the local directors in the face of
overwhelming evidence and adapting to the changes that comes with
Neurodiversity but also our digital ambitions. I do hope you can
influence them to take the right course.”
157. The claimant did not specify what the “overwhelming evidence” of
discrimination was. We find the claimant’s absolute conviction by this point was that
the only possible explanation for any setbacks to his aim to be appointed IT Director
was discrimination on the part of the respondent’s senior management.
The claimant’s request to change line manager
158. On 10 June the claimant sent a confidential e-mail to Mr Al-Qasmi. He said it
was not to be shared directly with Mr Coupe. He repeated what he had said in his
email to Mr Omerhodzic about his lack of confidence in Mr Coupe. He recommended
that with immediate effect (i) he no longer report to Mr Coupe and (ii) that Mr Coupe
no longer chair the informal grievance process. The claimant said that although he'd
been open in his criticisms of Mr Coupe previously, he now felt that continuing to
include him in communications might create feelings of resentment and lead to Mr
Coupe victimising the claimant. He would allow Mr Al-Qasmi to give Mr Coupe key
points in an appropriate way but only where that could be justified.
159. The claimant made it clear that while he continued to be under Mr Coupe’s
management it would be under duress. He would copy key emails to Mr. Al-Qasmi.
He would be wary of one-to-one face to face meetings with Mr Coupe specially ones
without agreed minutes and other participants. He said he was also wary of Mr
Coupe’s ability to impartially carry out performance reviews.
160. The claimant confirmed that his disability and the situation (including his lack of
confidence in Mr Coupe) had been disclosed to Mr Omerhodzic so he might initiate
contact with the UK directors or with Mr Al-Qasmi. Because there had already been
disclosure, he was happy for Mr Al-Qasmi to discuss the claimant’s disability with Mr
Omerhodzic in the hope of reaching a successful resolution to the informal grievance
before it concluded. However, “my perspective bearing all factors in mind and evidence
will be the final deciding factor on my part for accepting any proposals to rectify the
grievance”.
Events from 11 June 2018 to 11 July 2018 - the informal grievance outcome, formal
grievance, change of line manager and the Aspiedent report.
161. Mr Coupe had a brief meeting with the claimant on his return to work on 11
June. Afterwards he emailed Mr Al-Qasmi a brief update. He said that the claimant
was very awkward and at no point made eye contact. He said in his opinion the
claimant was not really listening. He said it could have been taken as quite
disrespectful but as the claimant had been off with stress and because of his condition
Mr Coupe said he did not make anything of it. He summarised the meeting as being
very awkward but said he was sure that that was to do with the claimant’s condition
and that it would take a while for him to settle back into the role. At the Tribunal hearing
the claimant criticised Mr Coupe for referring to him as “awkward” and not making eye
29

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
contact. We find that although Mr Coupe noted those things it is clear he did not take
any offence at them or view them as a negative. Instead, he acknowledged them to
be manifestations of the claimant’s autism. We find it was an example of Mr Coupe
acknowledging the claimant’s disability rather than, as the claimant suggests, viewing
him adversely because of it.
Informal grievance outcome
162. Mr Coupe rejected the claimant’s informal grievance in an outcome letter dated
14 June 2018. In summary, his conclusions were that:
• There was no business requirement for an IT director for the respondent in the UK.
• Mr Coupe had discussed with Mr Omerhodzic whether the claimant needed to
report to Mr Cornwell for OneIT to be successful. Mr Omerhodzic wanted the
claimant to have a close working relationship with the UK executive team to help
the respondent better understand and utilise the technology available. However,
Mr Omerhodzic’s position was that the size of a Group country organisation
determined the appropriate reporting line. His view was that the claimant reporting
directly to the managing director was not a requirement for OneIT to be successful.
• However, because the claimant had raised the issue of his line management, Mr
Coupe had arranged a meeting on 19 June for the claimant, Mr Cornwell and Mr
Al-Qasmi to review and discuss that issue
• During his investigation he'd found no evidence that there had ever been any
unintentional or intentional discrimination towards the claimant and no evidence to
support his belief that he had been passed over for promotion.
• He believed that the claimant was rewarded appropriately and fairly for the role
which he currently undertook. His rewards were in line with the performance of the
business and his market rate and matched with the respondent’s overall ability to
pay.
• When it came to the claimant’s criticisms about the failure to take steps to
understand the claimant’s condition and make adaptations from October 2015, Mr
Coupe decided that the respondent had tried to support him by allowing him to
work flexibly from home when he chose and providing him with a new office with
natural light. The respondent had also tried to set up an OH appointment but that
the claimant had not been happy with the choice of OH physician. He noted the
respondent was now making arrangements for Aspiedent to carry out a workplace
assessment.
• If an employee needed specific support they should ask the respondent and all
reasonable requests for support would be considered. The respondent would
consider any recommendations made by Aspiedent
• When it came to the suggestion of awareness training, the respondent would await
the report from Aspiedent and discuss that with the claimant before making any
decisions to arrange any training on neurodiversity. He suggested that the claimant
should perhaps consider making the wider management team aware of his autism
so they could adopt their style when working or communicating with him. The
30

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
respondent was concerned that if they did arrange neurodiversity training the fact
the training was being carried out might unintentionally disclose the claimant’s
autism.
163. The claimant emailed Mr Al-Qasmi later that same day to confirm that he would
now like to proceed to a formal grievance
The claimant‘s formal grievance
164. The claimant’s email (pp.259-260) confirmed that the substance of his formal
grievance was the same as his informal grievance. However, there were additional
points arising from the outcome of the informal grievance which he wanted to add
because they were causing him “sustained and continual injury to feelings and stress”.
He outlined those additional points in six bullet points.
165. In summary, he said that:
• He did not think that all relevant evidence had been consulted and found it.
“incredible” that there could not have been any acknowledgment that there may
have been unintentional discrimination because of his “obvious differences in
approach and required adaptations.”
• He lacked confidence in Mr Coupe's ability to carry out an unbiased, objective,
informal grievance process and had asked for him to be taken off this
responsibility prior to the outcome.
• The decision not to have an IT director was “spurious” and “career and influence
limiting” for him. He said he wanted to explore this given it had wide-ranging
implications for the Group.
• If there never had been an IT Director role he queried why he had not been
given clarity about that back in 2015 instead of the decision on that role being
continually deferred.
• He had not been promised a change in reporting line only a review meeting
which he suggested was to delay that decision.
• He would provide further comment on the outcome document once that had
been provided in Word format.
166. He asked whether the respondent had taken any legal advice to come to the
informal outcome. He concluded by saying “Ever hopeful, but pragmatic that this was
the expected outcome from Mr Coupe’s leading of this. Let's try again in the formal
context.” The informal process had, he said “wasted his time and caused further
stress.”
The meeting on 19 June 2018 and the change of line manager
167. In light of the issues about Mr Coupe raised by the claimant in his formal
grievance, Mr Cornwell decided it was appropriate to consider changing the claimant’s
line management. He discussed that at a meeting with the claimant and Mr Al Qasmi
on 19 June 2018. The claimant’s notes of that meeting were in the Bundle (pp.261-
31

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
262.) Mr Cornwell’s view at the time was that they accurately reflected the meeting
(p.263) and we base our findings on them.
168. We find that at the meeting the claimant again made clear his lack of trust in Mr
Coupe's management of him. Mr Cornwell mentioned that he felt the claimant had
been disrespectful in continuing to copy Mr Coupe into emails which criticised his
management and lack of support of the claimant. The claimant explained he'd been
keeping Mr Coupe copied into those emails because he hoped that he would “see the
mistakes he was making and change course”. The claimant said he had now realised,
theoretically, that he might be winding Mr Coupe up unintentionally so had decided to
just send criticism of Mr Coupe's management to Mr Al Qasmi.
169. The claimant said he was sorry if Mr Coupe's feelings were hurt but said that
was unintentional. He said that unfortunately Mr Coupe’s management of him had
been dysfunctional. He suggested that had been with an overall goal of “keeping [the
claimant] in his place”. He cited the outcome of the informal grievance as being an
example of that bias on Mr Coupe’s part.
170. Mr Cornwell asked the claimant whether he felt that adaptations had been
made. He referred specifically to the respondent allowing home working and providing
the claimant with an office with natural light. (At that date, the claimant was working 3
days a week at home and 2 days in the office). The claimant said that neither of those
had been anything to do with his autism. The home working had been for childcare
reasons and getting an office had taken numerous requests over a decade. The
claimant cited the latter as another example of where Mr Coupe could have done more
to support the claimant
171. There was then a discussion about why it would be appropriate for the claimant
to report to Mr Cornwell rather than, for example, another senior manager. The
claimant made the case that IT had an important enabling role and should be central
to what the respondent did in the next few years. Reporting directly to Mr Cornwell as
managing director would enable that.
172. The claimant also referred to his achievements within the company. That led to
what the notes referred to as “crossed wires”, with Mr Cornwell perceiving the claimant
to be diminishing the contribution of others. The claimant explained that was a
misunderstanding caused by his communication style. He confirmed he was not
questioning the contribution of others, only saying that the claimant's vision, talent and
area of expertise could bring large benefits for the way the business operated from the
top to the bottom.
173. As a result of their discussion, Mr Cornwell agreed that as a temporary measure
while the grievance was ongoing, the claimant would report to him rather than Mr
Coupe.
174. Mr Cornwell raised concerns at the end of the meeting that the claimant was
already jumping ahead in his mind to legal proceedings. The claimant made it clear
that as he had expressed in writing he was keen to see matters resolved at the earliest
stage and stressed his loyalty to the respondent and the Group.
175. It was agreed that the claimant’s grievance meeting would take place on 28
June 2018, chaired by Mr Cornwell. Mr Cornwell acknowledged the need to set aside
32

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
enough time to ensure the grievance was fully discussed. He asked the claimant to
ensure that he provided Mr Cornwell with all the relevant evidence needed to deal with
the grievance. The claimant agreed to prepare accordingly.
The claimant’s concerns about the Aspiedent Report
176. In the meantime, the respondent had commissioned a workplace assessment
report from Aspiedent, the organisation suggested by the claimant. That resulted in a
report (“the Aspiedent Report”) dated 25 June (pp.268-279). It was based on a face to
face meeting Dr Guest of Aspiedent had with the claimant on 20 June 2018. She also
spoke to Mr Coupe and Mr Cornwell by phone. Although they were not in the Bundle,
it is clear that there were email exchanges between Dr Guest and the claimant on the
21 June 2018 in which he raised concerns about the proposed approach in the report.
177. On 21 June 2018, the claimant emailed Mr Al-Qasmi, copying in Mr Cornwell
to express his concerns about the approach which Aspiedent was taking in the
report. He said that in his opinion, they might have to find another provider and that
the Aspiedent Report might not address his personal needs.
178. He set out his reasons for that in his email. The core disagreement was with
what the claimant saw as Dr Guest’s insistence on extended disclosure of the
claimant’s autism as the way to get the right support. The claimant favoured targeted
disclosure. He accepted that required him to maintain a level of masking and
“containing his condition” in certain situations. His view was that doing so was
fundamental to existing and working in a highly structured corporate environment. He
said he was happy to compensate most of the time and work to accommodate others
when he could. While stressing that he was not suggesting that Aspiedent would
intentionally act unprofessionally, the claimant also suggested that its approach
might give rise to an unintended conflict of interest. The wider disclosure advocated
by Dr Guest would enable Aspiedent to provide training and awareness for the
respondent and have a continued business relationship with it.
179. In those circumstances, the claimant said that Aspiedent’s report would “likely
be rejected by myself even if some points have validity”. He suggested that they may
need to source further dedicated expertise in ASD who could assist and make
recommendations in the context of the claimant’s preferred “limited disclosure”
approach.
180. Mr Al-Qasmi responded by email the following day. He pointed out that the
respondent had engaged Aspiedent at the claimant’s request. They had spent
significantly more on the report than they would have spent with Medigold or on an
OH report. The respondent felt that Aspiedent offered a service which would be
beneficial for it in better understanding the claimant’s condition and trying to make
reasonable adjustments where possible. The report was important for the respondent
in order to support the claimant further within the workplace. Mr Al-Qasmi confirmed
that having checked in with Mr Cornwell, they would both like to continue working
with Aspiedent. He suggested that they await the report itself and the claimant could
provide comments on any areas that he disagreed with. He stressed that if the
claimant did not wish to disclose his condition to others, then that would be his
choice. Dr Guest couldn't force him to do so only make recommendations.
33

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
181. Later that afternoon the claimant emailed Mr Al-Qasmi to confirm he would not
be interfacing with Aspiedent anymore and did not approve of their using his
personal data in any context beyond the production of their report. If the respondent
wanted to source generic training from Aspiedent that was its choice, but while there
was a focus on a “rigid approach” (i.e. wider disclosure) he would not approve that as
suitable because it might be biased to disclosure as the only route (pp.265).
182. The claimant gave consent for the Aspiedent Report to be released to Mr
Cornwell and Ms Johnson late on 28 June. Dr Guest emailed it to them on 29 June.
The contents and recommendations from the Aspiedent Report
183. The Aspiedent Report was in 4 sections.
184. The first section (“Background”) set out the respective perspectives of the
claimant and his managers (i.e. Mr Coupe and Mr Cornwell).
185. It reported that the claimant had a very strong sense of hierarchy and a belief
in the power that results from that hierarchy. He viewed his role as being at a
different “power level” to others in the leadership team because they reported direct
to the managing director and he did not. He believed that meant that the IT function
did not have the recognition in the business that it should have. He also believed he
could not fulfil his role effectively unless he was IT Director. The report reported the
claimant’s belief that because he had not been promoted to IT Director, he must
have been discriminated against. It noted the claimant’s formal grievance and his
desired outcomes from it and the risk that the claimant would take the respondent to
the Employment Tribunal for disability discrimination.
186. That section also recorded the managers’ recognition of the claimant's
excellent contribution to the business, being seen as a visionary regarding IT. Mr
Coupe and Mr Cornwell agreed that the claimant could do the job of an IT Director
and if the post was available, he would almost certainly get the promotion. The lack
of promotion was, they said, nothing to do with the claimant but with the
management structures of the Group. In short, there was currently no IT director role
in the UK because the UK subsidiary (i.e. the respondent) was not considered by the
Group to be large enough for a full IT Director. That's also the case in relation to
other subsidiaries in other countries of a similar size. It was also the case for other
roles in the respondent, e.g. there was no HR Director in the UK (Mr Al-Qasmi’s post
was Head of HR).
187. There were areas for improvement relating to slippage on the delivery of IT
projects and information only being provided when requested. Mr Coupe and Mr
Cornwell confirmed that they had not intentionally or unintentionally discriminated
against the claimant. They expressed frustration that claimant had limited their ability
to support him by refusing to disclose his autism more widely. They said they had
tried to protect him from “the ire” of senior managers who he had inadvertently
offended, but that was difficult when they could not explain why the claimant
behaved as he did. Occasionally they perceived that the claimant saw conspiracies
that were not there. They confirmed that Mr Cornwell spent time with him to try and
explain what was really going on.
34

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
188. Section 2 of the report was headed “Autism profile”. It reported the claimant had
little awareness of how his autism affected him apart from his communication issues.
It recorded the claimant’s sensory issues such as his hypersensitivity to touch and his
finding large crowds very difficult. A sub-section dealt with “Emotions”. It reported that
the claimant prided himself on logic but was hypersensitive both to his own emotions
and the emotions of others. It noted that the claimant got upset when he discovered
that he had accidentally offended someone and that that was a source of stress. The
report noted that the claimant did react emotionally rather than logically on a couple of
issues.
189. Section 3 was headed “Cognitive Profile”. The sub-section on “Mental Model”
characterised the claimant as a “word-rule thinker” which meant that he modelled the
world via a set of rules and attempted to get by with a logical application of those rules.
There were issues when applying the rules to cope with social interaction, because
people regularly break the rules. The difficult problem was working out the “meta-rules”
that tell you when it is acceptable to break the rules and when not to, which is very
difficult. Logic was important which meant that if something did not make logical sense
to the claimant, he found it very difficult not to challenge it. That had got him into trouble
because senior managers don't like having their decisions challenged.
190. The sub-section on “Executive Functioning Issues” reported that the claimant's
executive function skills were well developed, although he had a few weaknesses, e.g.
struggling to deal with change and struggling when having to stop what he was doing
to attend to something else.
191. The sub-section headed “Social communication Issues” reported that the
claimant had significant communication issues. He admitted to not understanding
people and could not predict how they would react. He was acutely aware that he was
different. Although he could put in effort and interact in socially acceptable ways, he
found that tiring. He preferred to interact with people through technology. That was
one reason why he would prefer not to spend more time in the office.
192. The final part of section 3 was headed “Other Issues”. In it, the report raised the
possibility that the claimant had OCD. The report suggested that some of the emails
the claimant had sent Dr Guest after his assessment showed signs of the kind of
anxiety common to OCD. It suggested that would explain much of the claimant’s “more
puzzling behaviour that cannot actually be explained by autism” such as seeing
conspiracies that weren't there. An obsessive fixation on something, especially
something the claimant was feeling a lot of emotion about would lead to the claimant
being ruled by emotion rather than logic. In that state, he would selectively choose
material to back his story while discounting the rest, as in fact most people do. It would
explain his belief that Mr Coupe, who had known him for 20 years did not care about
him and was not interested in understanding how best to help him.
193. The sub-section headed “Reserve and Neurodiversity” reported that the
claimant found it extremely difficult to talk about himself and to share anything of “the
real person behind the façade”. It suggested that maintaining that “façade”, as it
characterised it, was not helpful and healthy in the long run. We find this was a core
area of contention between Dr Guest and the claimant which led to the claimant
stopping his involvement with Aspiendent.
35

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
194. The report advised that the claimant used logic to try to explain everything,
including things about himself. It suggested that, for example, the claimant accusing
his managers of unintentional discrimination because they hadn't given him the
promotion he wanted provided an excuse for not examining whether there might be
other reasons for the decision, perhaps reasons that could not be explained logically.
The report suggested that it did not occur to the claimant that his managers might not
have the power to give him what he wanted or that it might not be the most efficient
thing for the business at that time to promote the claimant for reasons that might not
be related to logic and operational efficiency.
195. The report noted the claimant’s view that the experience of others (including
other autistic people) was of no relevance to him unless they thought in a very similar
way to him. The report recommended that the claimant needed to become more
flexible in his thinking in this area. It suggested there was potentially a lot to learn from
other autistic adults and that the claimant should “have the humility to listen” and sift
the information for relevance to him instead of dismissing them outright because they
don't think just like he does.
196. The report voiced concerns that the claimant was very disparaging of
“neurotypicals”. It also noted that the claimant appeared to consider his way of thinking
to be superior to how others think. It acknowledged that was true in some situations
but not others. It said the claimant’s list of reasonable adjustments made the
assumption that if people were not listening to his ideas, that was because they were
being narrow minded. There was no room in his mind for the notion that the problem
might be that he had fundamentally misunderstood something that could not be
explained logically.
197. Section 4 of the report was a table of “Recommended Reasonable
Adjustments”. They were set out in 2 columns. That was because the report
recommended that while the claimant did need some reasonable adjustments to be
made, the claimant also needed to make reasonable adjustments for those around
him. He needed to appreciate neurodiversity in others and accept that everyone had
their strengths and weaknesses. There were “parallel” adjustments required for the
claimant by the respondent and of the claimant.
198. The recommended adjustments by the respondent included steps such as
minimising the need for the claimant to attend social occasions, giving warning of
change and setting clear objectives in writing making clear what would need to be
achieved in order to achieve promotion (and how that was measured). They were
parallelled by recommended adjustments for the claimant to develop strategies to
cope with social occasions and accepting that people see social occasions as
important to build relationships. The report recommend that he accept that change
would happen and that not all change would be logical or look optimal. He was
recommended to be less rigid in his thinking and to accept there may be political and
organisational constraints that the claimant was unaware of and struggle to
understand.
199. When it came to issues related to communication, the report recommended that
the respondent be “lenient” when the claimant said something that could be construed
as offensive and accept he does not understand social norms and has little or no
concept of organisational politics. The parallel recommendation for the claimant was
36

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
to “Accept and appreciate the different ways in which people think and perceive the
world. Be lenient when they accidentally upset you. They are not able to get it right all
the time.”
200. The respondent was recommended to “Try to explain everything in a logical
way. It will help to make reference to efficiency.” That was parallelled by a
recommendation that the claimant “Accept that not everything has a logical
explanation and that there may be times when you are unable to understand why
something is happening. Accept that most people find logical reasoning very difficult
and be more patient.”
201. The respondent was recommended “When providing difficult feedback on [the
claimant’s] work, try to concentrate on the actual work rather than on [the claimant].
Try to find solutions to the work issue rather than make it an issue about [the claimant],
e.g. in an email ask when the job will be done rather than asking when he will get
round to getting the job done”.
202. The claimant was recommended to “Reduce the fear of disclosure by gradually
disclosing. This is gradually disclosing content and gradually widening the number of
people who know.”
203. The respondent was also recommended to “Acknowledge [the claimant's]
comments and ideas. Provide feedback where possible.”
204. The claimant was recommended to “Carefully consider any feedback you are
given. Accept that not all your ideas will be good. Accept that you may have a
fundamental misunderstanding that nobody knows how to explain to you.”
205. In giving consent for the report to be released to the respondent the claimant
thanked Dr Guest for her input. While acknowledging their differences he expressed
the view that it had been worthwhile seeking a more detailed assessment than a
standard OH assessment would have provided. We find that he was pleased with
some aspects of the report, specifically Mr Coupe and Mr Cornwell’s confirmation that
if there was an UK IT Director role the claimant would be promoted. We find that
overall, he viewed the report as helpful. However, there is no evidence that he made
the respondent aware that he had shifted position from that set out in his email of 22
June to Mr Al-Qasmi.
The formal grievance meeting and outcome
206. The formal grievance meeting took place on the 28 June 2018, before the
Aspiedent Report was released to the respondent. The meeting was chaired by Mr
Cornwell. Ms Johnson of the respondent’s HR team attended to take notes. The
claimant was accompanied at the meeting by a colleague, Mr Collin.
207. On 5 July Mr Cornwell met Mr Coupe to carry out further investigation into the
points raised by the claimant. Mr Cornwell emailed the claimant the grievance outcome
on the 11 July 2018. By that date Mr Cornwell did have the Aspiedent Report. He
rejected the claimant’s grievance.
208. In summary, Mr Cornwell concluded that:
37

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• There was no requirement for an UK IT Director. That was because of the size
and turnover of the respondent and because the introduction of OneIT meant
local markets would have less power to make decisions.
• The claimant’s 2017 Leadership Review had been conducted fairly and without
bias and there was no basis for retrospectively reviewing the claimant’s scores.
Mr Coupe’s scoring had been reviewed by the Group management who had
recommended reducing the claimant’s scores because they did not see
evidence of over performance compared to his peers. It had not been possible
to adjust that to take into account the claimant’s disability because he was not
willing to share his diagnosis with the Group management. However,
adjustments had been made in setting targets. Mr Cornwell gave as an
example the Total Purchase Plan Project where adjustments had been made
including allowing the claimant to work from home so he could focus at times
that suited him, removing the burden of monthly reporting and allowing the
claimant to be absent or leave management meetings early. Despite those
adjustments the project was not completed within the timeline set.
• There had been no lack of workplace adaptations. In the wake of his diagnosis,
Mr Coupe had asked the claimant to let him know if there was anything the
respondent could do to help the claimant. The claimant had not raised any
problems or adjustments other than requesting flexible working or a change of
office. Those had been granted. Mr Coupe had made discrete changes to the
way he managed the claimant having a better of understanding of how he
worked and why he reacted in certain ways. Mr Coupe accepted he could have
carried out more detailed research into autism and maybe insisted they disclose
the claimant’s autism to Mr Al-Qasmi at an early stage to enable discussion
about wider workplace adjustments. At that point the claimant was not in favour
of wider disclosure.
• When the claimant asked for a formal workplace assessment the respondent
had commissioned the Aspiedent Report, the claimant having rejected 3 other
OH providers identified by the respondent. Although the claimant no longer
wished to engage with Dr Guest, he had agreed that some of her report,
including the recommended adjustments, carried merit. Mr Cornwell suggested
there may be value in continuing to work with Dr Guest to provide mediation or
ongoing advice and support if the claimant was willing to do so.
• There was no evidence of unintentional discrimination against the claimant
stifling his development opportunities. Mr Cornwell did not accept that Mr
Coupe did not encourage development of talent as there were plenty of
examples of individuals who had developed under his management. By his own
account, Mr Omerhodzic had offered the claimant a more senior role which the
claimant had turned down because he preferred a hands-on role. There had
been flashpoints with Mr Omerhodzic but since Mr Omerhodzic did not know
about the claimant’s autism he could not have discriminated against the
claimant because of his disability.
• Disclosure of the claimant’s autism more widely would help the respondent and
the Group to make adaptations. The claimant accepted that disclosure to senior
38

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
managers would be beneficial because most of the misunderstandings which
occurred were with senior managers and those with influence.
• At the claimant’s request, and without any criticism of Mr Coupe’s ability to
develop and manage his teams, the claimant’s reporting line to Mr Cornwell
would be made permanent.
209. Mr Cornwell identified the next steps as being for the claimant, Mr Cornwell and
Mr Al-Qasmi to meet to discuss the workplace adjustments recommended in the
Aspiedent Report. There would also be a meeting to discuss how, when and to whom
the claimant would disclose his autism. Mr Cornwell would support him in any
disclosure. More generally, the respondent would arrange Equality and Diversity
training for all managers and had launched an online Diversity in the Workplace and
Unconscious Bias training module for all employees. The aim was to increase
education for all employees without disclosing the claimant’s autism. We find that
training did subsequently take place. It was not specific to autism but attendance was
monitored and enforced by the respondent’s HR team.
11 July 2018 to 1 September 2018 – the claimant’s grievance appeal and 2018
Tribunal claim
The claimant’s grievance appeal
210. Mr Cornwell’s grievance outcome letter provided for a right of appeal to Marc
Perez, Regional Director. The claimant exercised that right on 15 July 2018. He did so
in a document called “Formal Grievance rebuttal” in which he went through Mr
Cornwell’s outcome letter and inserted his rebuttal comments. In brief, he did not
accept that the respondent had made any (or at least any significant) adaptations for
him related to his disability, did not accept the delays in delivery of the Total Purchase
Plan were his fault and continued to maintain that discrimination (or at least
unconscious bias) had hampered his review score and progression. When it came to
the denial of development opportunities, the claimant said he still “held to [his] theory
of possible unconscious bias in operation”. He provided detail to support each rebuttal.
He prefaced his detailed rebuttal with 4 points he said were outstanding:
“1. There is a challenge to the 2016/2017 leadership review process and its
execution in that it may have created discrimination. This is in the context of
disclosure to my line manager previously and explicitly pointing out that my
condition should be taken into account. - Action requested - detailed analysis
and presentation of evidence of the process and execution and if flawed, a
written apology, compensation and a detailed review of the 2016/2017
leadership review and the implications actioned if I would have scored for
vertical progression.
2. There was a 2 year+ delay in telling me after my repeated enquires a
position that I sought in the UK was not available, leaving me with a false
impression and affecting my personally held career development aims which
I could have modified. - Action requested- a written apology and
compensation for the delay in telling me such a position was not available.
3. I want to explore the possibility that bias, even unintentional or
unconscious held by those undisclosed of my condition, but only seeing its
perceived ‘negative’ effects in my career history may have impacted my
39

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
scoring or view of my capability or potential for more senior executive roles.
- - Action requested- a balanced detailed holistic review of my career
presenting evidence to the contrary convincing me of lack of bias as opposed
to evidence I have that would indicate it has been present.
4. As my condition continually affects me, implications on the roles I can take
unless they are adapted should be understood because of my disadvantage,
a review should be completed and forward planning put in place., Actions
requested - a detailed written review of how I might grow in seniority in future
years with a built in consideration of my condition and subsequent strengths
and weaknesses. Special consideration or compensation if I am unable to take
a more senior role or turn one down because of circumstances connected to
my disability.”
211. When it came to the suggestion that the respondent had made adaptations by
granting him flexible working and giving him and office with natural light the claimant
again said that those had been unrelated to his disability. In response to the suggestion
that he had not asked for help, the claimant said that the process for seeking
adjustments was a technical one. He disputed that he had not asked for help or that
there had been opportunities for Mr Coupe to provide it. Specifically, he suggested
that there had been a number of conversations in 2017 which had resulted in flash
points which provided opportunities for Mr Coupe to mention or propose things.
212. The claimant went on to note Mr Coupe’s “concession” that he could have
insisted on disclosing to HR in order to get support. The claimant said, “This is a fault”
and that he “hoped it would not happen again if someone else presented a disability
to [Mr Coupe]”. The claimant suggested he had made many concessions for Mr Coupe
such as his business and focus on his duties and what he referred to as “pressure
from above to normalise my scorings”. Therefore, the claimant said he “can personally
forgive such fault by Mr Coupe as an individual” but the claimant still had to address
the fallout and hurt to his feelings to set future precedent for improved company
process and management awareness.”
213. When it came to Mr Cornwell’s proposed next steps, the claimant welcomed
the decision to change his reporting line to Mr Cornwell on a permanent basis noting
it as “an important development that has been conceded”. He confirmed that not all
parts of the Aspiedent Report were accepted but some parts were, and they could
discuss that. However, he again made it clear that he would not be comfortable
working with Dr Guest going forward.
214. Mr Cornwell had exchanged emails with Dr Guest about Aspiedent potentially
providing social skills and networking training and support for the claimant. Dr Guest
also offered training about autism or neurodiversity for staff more widely. Mr Cornwell
confirmed he would suggest it to the claimant but that it was very much up to him
whether he would want to take up that support. We accept the respondent took the
view that there was no purpose in pursuing that support or training given the claimant’s
position on further engagement with Aspiedent in his rebuttal.
31 July 2018 Appeal outcome
215. The grievance appeal meeting took place on 24 July 218 by Skype. It was
chaired by Daniel Martin, the Group’s HR Director & Regional HR Business Partner
for Region 2. Mr Al-Qasmi attended to provide HR support and Ms Johnson acted as
40

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
note taker. The claimant’s trade union representative, Mr Collin, was on annual leave
but the claimant confirmed he was happy to continue in his absence.
216. Mr Martin did not uphold the claimant’s appeal. The outcome letter addressed
each of the claimant’s 4 points at para 210 above in turn. The appeal was by way of
review of Mr Cornwell’s decision as opposed to a re-hearing. Mr Martin agreed with
Mr Cornwell that the claimant’s Leadership Reviews had been conducted fairly and
without bias. He confirmed that there was no IT director role for the UK because of the
size of the UK business. Noting that the claimant had been offered a new Senior
Manager role and core membership of the Architecture Advisory Board in 2018, Mr
Martin said he could not see any bias, even unintentional or unconscious bias by those
to whom the claimant had not disclosed his condition. While acknowledging the
claimant was a technical expert with a strong ambition to take his career further, he
said that could not automatically work in three-year cycles. New opportunities for the
claimant would present themselves as and when there was a business need for such
roles. When it came to future development, Mr Martin encouraged the claimant, if he
wanted to undertake a particular role to formally express his interest to the relevant
HR team. In summary he said that he had found no evidence that there had been any
unintentional or intentional discrimination towards the claimant nor any evidence to
support his belief that he had been passed over for promotion.
217. He also encouraged the claimant to highlight that he had a disability should he
decide to apply for a role. Mr Martin shared his own positive experience of having
disclosed his disability to line managers and colleagues in the Group. He said that had
enabled them to adapt their working styles while working with him. He said his
disability had never been perceived as a negative and he had never experienced
discrimination, just positive support from the whole organisation.
218. Mr Martin’s letter said the appeal decision was final.
219. The claimant started ACAS Early Conciliation on 31 July 2018 and submitted
his 2018 Tribunal claim on 1 September 2018. The original grounds of claim set out a
timeline of events from 2006 onwards over 17 pages which the claimant explained was
necessary to explain the background to his case. He identified as a “critical event” an
incident in June 2013 when the CEO of the Group, Andreas Joehle (“Mr Joehle”)
visited the UK. Mr Joehle had been offended by a presentation given by the claimant
which was critical of the Group’s central IT function. The claimant said Mr Joehle had
“erupted with belittling offensive language” towards the claimant in front of his peers.
The claimant identified that as incident “set the scene conducive to ongoing
discrimination and bias” in the way managers dealt with the claimant.
220. He restated his concerns about the 2016 and 2017 Leadership Reviews and
the delay in providing clarity about the existence of an UK IT Director role what he saw
The essence of his claim was summarised at para 12:
“Due to historical 'flashpoints', connected to his disability, (that Is where the Claimant is
perceived as challenging) with senior figures in the local company and international
group including the current CEO, pre and post diagnosis, there has been consistent
delay because of unfavourable bias in addressing the Claimant’s ambitions for career
development despite repeated petitions. The Claimant has been passed over for a title
change or promotion in the local company despite requesting this since December 2015
and showing recognised talent and, exceptional effort with output of strategic value.
41

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
Other comparators in the UK and international company have experienced promotion in
this time period.”
221. The claimant sought damages, a retrospective review of the respondent and
Group HR’s talent development and promotion processes. He also sought
compensatory measures or adaptations to address the claimant’s inability to assume
certain roles in OneIT because of disability, disability in his family and resource
constraints. He suggested this could mean “a more flexible approach to local
promotion, roles, titles and reward of country-based IT staff than perceived as dictated
by Group matrix organisation structure”. In essence, we understand that to mean that
the claimant was seeking to be appointed as IT Director in the UK with commensurate
benefits despite that not being in accordance with the Group’s usual practice for
smaller country group companies like the respondent.
October 2018 to November 2019 - transition to OneIT
222. Throughout this period there were discussions about the claimant’s transition
to OneIT. Because the claimant was head of the UK IT team, his new role had to be
sorted out before the rest of the team could be transitioned into OneIT. The role
originally proposed for the claimant was as Senior Manager, Technical Delivery Lead
Digital process Automation (p.368). A key element of that role related to a technology
called PEGA and it was referred to in discussion as “the PEGA Role”. The intention
was that his matrix manager for OneIT would be Subhrajyoti Bose (“Mr Bose”). He was
the Director Digital Project Engineering.
223. In a document dated 20 March 2019 headed “Requirements for successful
Transition to One IT Role” the claimant set out his assumptions, requests for
clarifications and requested adaptations relating to the PEGA Role (pp.348-353). He
said his primary motivation was to seek promotion in any new role. His assumptions
were that he would be based in the UK, his management and reporting line would
change and that job adaptations would be made to take into account his disability and
support him in the job. Another assumption was that his job would be funded from the
OneIT budget not the respondent’s budget. He asked for clarity about how many staff
he would be managing and whether further team members in the UK would be
migrated to One IT.
224. The claimant set out a list of 11 examples of adaptations which he said would
be more fully documented in future:
“1) Training and awareness of those already disclosed in cooperation with CT and material
sourced.
2) Regular communication with his manager Mr Bose to provide feedback to CT
3) To not take challenge to logic as challenge to authority. Cultural adjustments on the
part of managers.
4) Working from home to current arrangements
5) Limiting travel
6) Communication style and counteracting misunderstandings
7) Help with priority management
42

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
8) Support with relationships, introductions. Help with conflict resolution
9) Other items raised in future which are an aspect of the disability.
10) Assistance with cross cultural communications.
11) Targeted disclosure at CT discretion to senior management to facilitate
understanding.”
225. On 20 March 2019 the claimant met with Mr Cornwell and Mr Bose. His
suggested adaptations were agreed in principle. Mr Bose confirmed that initially the
claimant would not be managing staff except external contractors but that there was a
possibility that further UK team members would be migrated in future. The claimant
had asked for confirmation that the new role was funded from the OneIT budget not
the UK budget. Mr Bose and Mr Cornwell’s answer was “yes and no”. The position,
we find, was that the claimant’s full salary and benefit was paid for the respondent but
it received payment from the Group for the work done by the claimant for the Group.
We find that this was important to the claimant because he was frustrated by what he
saw as a reluctance by the respondent (specifically Mr Cornwell) to award him the pay
rises and bonuses he felt he deserved. We find, however, that the key sticking point
for the claimant was that the new role was effectively a demotion. It was at Grade 5
rather than the claimant’s current Grade 6. As such it was not the promotion that the
claimant saw as a crucial characteristic of any new role. He made that clear in a follow
up email to Mr Bose and Mr Cornwell that afternoon.
226. Mr AL-Qasmi raised the issue with Sven Leiske (“Mr Leiske”). He was the VP
of Total Rewards in the Group's Compensation & Benefit team. He in turn discussed
it with Mr Omerhodzic. On 30 April, Mr Leiske confirmed to Mr Al-Qasmi that according
to the Group's Grading methodology, the PEGA Role was at Grade 5. As a clear
exception, however, they agreed to offer the role at Grade 6. That recognised the
claimant’s existing Grade 6 role and the importance of the PEGA technology for the
Group. That position was confirmed by Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi in a formal
“Variation of contract” letter to the claimant dated 8 May 2019. It proposed a 3 June
2019 start date for the PEGA Role and confirmed that the claimant's current role would
be disbanded and his current duties re-assigned to existing members of the IT team.
The letter was approved by Mr Bose and sent to the claimant on 14 May.
227. The claimant responded on 16 May by email to Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi.
He said he had a number of questions which would have to be resolved before he took
up the role (p.374). He said that in the absence of an actual promotion, the “only way
to give the job offer the characteristics of the promotion I desire “was a “significant
salary shift”. Otherwise, he said, he was being asked to “sign and accept a status quo
of non-progression”. He invited the respondent to “open with an offer”. He also asked
whether there were any imminent positions in the Group in One IT or otherwise at
Grade 7 level.
228. On 16 May 2019 Mr Al-Qasmi asked Mr Bose whether there was any chance
of reviewing the claimant's salary. Mr Cornwell shared his view that they should be fair
and equitable. If the claimant's new role merited a higher package that should be given
but if he was already in line, there was no requirement for a pay increase. He said that
his view was that the claimant was minded to accept the role but only if the salary was
reviewed. He said they should not "be held to ransom" but should also make sure they
were being fair and equitable.
43

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
229. Mr Bose provided his feedback by email on 16 May 2019. He said that having
interacted with the claimant and with a fair analysis of the rest of the team, he did not
see that his capabilities were at Grade 6. While he accepted the argument of the
claimant being Grade 6 because of his current role he did not see any reason (from a
functional assessment point of view) for a salary increase. There was a lot of learning
for him to get adapted the new global role and he did not really see him at a stage to
be "promoted " to the role.
230. Mr Al-Qasmi relayed that to the claimant on 17 May. He confirmed there were
currently no Grade 7 positions open within One IT. He gave the claimant until 23 May
2019 to decide whether to accept the PEGA Role. The claimant responded asking
what the Group would do if he did not accept the role on offer.
231. On 21 May Mr Al-Qasmi confirmed that the implementation of OneIT meant the
duties of the claimant's current role would be reassigned and his role would cease to
be required. If he did not wish to accept the new role and suitable alternative
employment could not be found in the One IT structure, the respondent would consider
placing his current role at risk of redundancy. Mr Al-Qasmi pointed out that the
proposed roll out date for OneIT in the UK was 1 January 2019. That had been
significantly delayed. He set a revised deadline of 7 June 2019 for the claimant to
make his decision with a proposed start date in the new role of 1 July 2019. The
claimant was sent an updated version of the formal Variation to Contract reflecting that
new proposed start date.
232. The claimant responded with a 2-page email on 21 May making it clear he was
not prepared to accept a new role unless it had the characteristics of promotion, i.e. a
salary increase. He said the respondent's assertion of the potential of redundancy was
"shocking, stressful and completely disrespecting him as an individual his role and
contribution, historic and current to the respondent". He asked on whose authority that
"threat of redundancy" had been issued if he did not agree to the variation of contract.
He asked for detailed reasoning why current his role would not be required and set out
his initial reasons why that was not the case. He said that the true motive for
threatening to put his role at risk way related to the 2018 Tribunal claim. He said that
this "strong arm" approach, continually dismissing his concerns was considered by
him to be victimisation. He said the respondent was effectively trying to oust him from
a position because he had been considered a troublemaker locally for exercising his
legal rights not to be discriminated against. He made it clear that if he was selected for
redundancy because he did not agree to the new role, he would bring legal action. He
also referred to his email to Ms Fuenfstueck of 14 April 2019 and said he was awaiting
the ultimate outcome of that because she was the ultimate authority in the Group. He
said that Mr Cornwell had claimed there was breakdown of working relationship
between them (pp.380-382).
233. Mr Al-Qasmi responded on 22 May. He denied there was a “threat” of
redundancy. The claimant had asked what would happen if he did not accept the
PEGA Role and the respondent had provided clarity on that. He said an employee
could not dictate company structure nor demand promotion or a salary increase. The
claimant had requested a promotion or salary increase, they had considered it and
had confirmed they could not offer that. He pointed out the wider opportunities for
promotion a role in OneIT potentially offered. He referred to the respondent’s flexibility
in increasing the PEGA Role from a Grade 5 to 6 to accommodate the claimant’s
44

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
concerns about his grade and its commitment to match his current salary and protect
existing benefits. He confirmed that the respondent and the Group were happy to
discuss any reasonable adjustments required. The claimant was asked to raise those
with Mr Bose. He reiterated the deadline of 7 June 2019 (pp.378-379).
234. The claimant responded by e-mail the same day. He suggested that Mr Al-
Qasmi had avoided his question about the authority levels involved in putting his role
at risk of redundancy. He said that he was reasonably trying to negotiate salary based
on a proposal for a variation of contract. He expressed the view that the respondent
was paying lip service to supporting him with adaptations. He had already made clear
in his document of 20 March that a key adaptation was for any transition to be on a
trial basis. That document also made clear his expectation of an increased salary. The
claimant said that the attempt to separate out the various issues "did not meet my
viewpoint". From the claimant's point of view his desire for promotion, the grievance
and 2018 Tribunal claim and the way the transition to OneIT was being approached
were all interlinked. The claimant confirmed he would raise the issues with Mr Bose.
235. Prior to that discussion, Mr Al-Qasmi emailed Mr Bose to bring him up to speed.
He explained that the claimant had pushed back on the attempts to integrate him into
OneIT. He also explained that UK employment law required reasonable adjustment
for someone with a disability but said that an employee could not request "excessive
or unreasonable adjustments" such as a significant pay rise or for the role to have
characteristics of a promotion. Mr Cornwell was also involved in the discussions with
Mr Bose.
236. On 3 June the claimant met with Mr Bose and Mr Al-Qasmi to discuss
adaptations for his proposed new role. The claimant set out his requirements in a
"Requested adaptations and adjustments" document dated 2 June 2019 (p.391-393).
In summary, the requirements were:
• a 3 month trial period in the new role
• the claimant to be completely relieved from UK responsibilities and tasks
during that trial period
• the claimant and Mr Bose to jointly agree at the end of the trial period
whether the role was suitable.
• If it was not, the claimant to return to his current role (or an evolved
version of it).
• Extensive support for up to a further 12 months if the new role was
accepted.
• A bonus for undertaking the trial (at 150% as a default).
237. The claimant also required continuation of his current home working pattern (a
maximum of 2 days in the office per month) and a “workable limit” on international
travel agreed. His document also set out points about the working relationship with Mr
Bose and others. Those included not taking challenge to logic as challenge to
authority, helping the claimant to resolve misunderstandings and providing company-
wide Neurodiversity training. Limited disclosure of the claimant's autism was
45

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
envisaged, with an expectation that those to whom disclosure was made would do
some learning to understand Autism but discussing the learning with the claimant "as
no Autistic person is the same".
238. The discussions at that first meeting centred on the proposed trial period and
what would happen if it was unsuccessful. We find that both sides took the view that
the other had been inflexible, contributing to delay in finalising the claimant’s transition
to the new role.
239. A further meeting on 11 June resulted in agreement on a trial period from 22
July to 22 October 2019. On 18 June 2019 the claimant was sent an updated version
of the Variation of Contract letter (pp.394-395). It said that if the trial period was
unsuccessful, the respondent would seek to find an alternative role for the claimant in
OneIT. In the "unlikely event" that was not possible a formal redundancy consultation
would begin alongside a continuing search for other suitable roles in One IT.
240. The claimant refused to sign the variation letter. In his response on 26 June
2019 to Mr Cornwell and Mr Omerhodzic (p.396) he expressed his concerns that he
was being forced in to a “trap”. He was being required to move to the OneIT on a “trial”
basis but on the understanding that his UK role would be made redundant even if the
trial was unsuccessful. He argued the UK role was still needed and there were
precedents for those in OneIT retaining local responsibilities. He said that unless there
was real concession, incentivisation and improvement of approach by the respondent
and the Group by 5 July 2019 he would “consider the matter closed” and would
continue working in his current UK role. His email referred to the then ongoing 2018
Tribunal claim and the “possible perception of me by various individuals including
those addressed in this letter”. He referred to a “heavy-handed move to get me away
from UK responsibilities and change my role with restrictive caveats, even if that is not
right for me personally”. He said if that approach continued it could amount to
victimisation or discrimination” and would result in legal action.
241. The discussions continued over the summer of 2019. Proposed meetings on
12 and 19 July were postponed for various reasons. Given the claimant’s
reservations about the role he had been offered, Mr Cornwell discussed possible
alternatives with Mr Omerhodzic. They identified a lead role in the re-design of the
respondent’s home delivery systems. In an exchange of emails with Mr Cornwell on
1 August 2019 the claimant confirmed that that role would play to his strengths and
that he had already told Mr Omerhodzic it seemed more suitable (pp.404-404).
242. Following further discussions, on 18 September 2019 Mr Bose emailed the
claimant the job description for the proposed role of Technical Solution Owner Home
Delivery (“the Home Delivery Role”) (p.416). In answer to queries raised by the
claimant in his email in response, Mr Bose confirmed the job would be on the
claimant’s existing grade with the same remuneration. After more discussions it was
agreed that the claimant would remain the UK IT team’s line manager for legal/HR
purposes. That was on the understanding that would take up no more than 5% of his
time. On functional matters, the members of the team would report to the relevant
OneIT functional manager.
243. On 2 October 2019 the claimant emailed Mr Bose (copying Mr Cornwell, Mr Al-
Qasmi and Mr Omerhodzic) to accept the Home Delivery Role. In his email he said he
46

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
did so on the basis he would be fully supported in the transition into the role by the
management of OneIT and the UK and there was a realistic prospect of future career
progression and promotion in OneIT.
244. The claimant started in the Home Delivery Role on 7 October 2019. In a letter
dated 4 October, Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi congratulated the claimant on his
appointment. The letter confirmed that the claimant would continue to report to Mr
Cornwell from an HR perspective, but from a functional day-to-day perspective he
would have a “dotted line report” to Mr Bose. The letter envisaged a 6-8 week transition
period during which it said the claimant would be fully supported. (p. 417)
Other incidents October 2018 to October 2019 – email to Ms Fuenfstueck, DSAR,
expenses, “York” incident, 2018 Bonus, 2019 peer review and September incidents
245. During the period when the discussions about the claimant’s transition to OneIT
were going on a number of incidents occurred. The claimant saw most of them as
reflecting Mr Coupe and Mr Cornwell being less patient with him and putting more
pressure on him about operational matters. Some of those incidents overlapped in
time. We have found it preferable to deal with each incident in turn from start to finish
rather than deal with all of them together chronologically.
246. At times during this period the claimant was absent from work due to ill-health.
That included a period of sickness absence throughout February and into early March
2019 due to “Stress and Autism”.
247. It was also during this period that the claimant wrote to Ms Fuenfstueck and Dr
Raymund Heinen (another member of the Group’s management board) about the
2018 Tribunal claim. He did so in a letter dated 14 April 2019 (pp.366-367). He
explained that he was an autistic person and the challenges that posed for him when
it came to communication. He said that even with his condition he knew it was not
conventional to write to them in the way he was doing and that he had considered it
very carefully. He explained that he had been seeking promotion to director level
(Grade 7) unsuccessfully since December 2015 and set out reasons why he thought
that was linked to his Autism. He said he was reaching out to find a way forward that
took a “holistic view of possibilities” and to find a way that he could drop his legal
action. He acknowledged in the letter that Ms Fuenfstueck and Dr Heinen may decline
to answer the letter because of the stage matters had reached.
248. There was no evidence about a response to that letter. We accept the
claimant’s evidence that he was not told that it was inappropriate for him to have
written to Ms Fuenfstueck.
The claimant’s data subject access request (DSAR)
249. On 29 October 2018 the claimant sent Mr Al-Qasmi a letter dated 28 October
requesting disclosure of documents (pp.319-326). It was to referred in evidence as a
DSAR, so we have adopted that as a shorthand when referring to it. However, the
claimant’s letter makes it clear that his initial request was for disclosure of documents
for the purposes of his 2018 Tribunal claim. It incorporated a DSAR but went much
wider, seeking “all relevant information available in any format that pertains to any of
the points raised in my claim and background” held by the Group and the respondent.
The scope of the request was also wide-ranging in terms of the time period it covered,
47

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
which dated back at least to 2013. It was also wide ranging in the kinds of information
sought. It included an (expressly non-exhaustive) list of 21 individuals or groups whose
communications were of particular relevance. That included Mr Cornwell, Mr Coupe,
Mr Al-Qasmi, Mr Omerhodzic, Mr Bose, Mr Heinzel, Mr Joehle, any Group board
members active during Mr Joehle’s tenure and “Group HR”. The claimant requested
the information by 12 November 2018. That was so he would receive it 10 days before
the preliminary hearing listed on 23 November in the 2018 Tribunal claim.
250. Ms Miller, the respondent’s solicitor, acknowledged the request on 31 October
2018. She explained that given the complexity and extent of the request the
respondent would need to extend the deadline for response to 3 months.
251. On 23 January 2019, Ms Johnson of the respondent’s HR emailed the claimant
to confirm that the DSAR documents were ready for collection (p.331). She explained
that they included documents stored in the claimant’s electronic and manual personnel
files from December 2018 (we think she meant 2017 the date of a previous DSAR
request).
252. The claimant emailed Mr. Al Qasmi the following day to say that he considered
the DSAR response was incomplete. He said the restriction of communications
disclosed to the period post December 2017 was arbitrary. He said the disclosure
should have been provided in electronic rather than paper format. He said that the
DSAR was unconnected to the tribunal claim. He asked for clarity that the DSAR
request would be fulfilled before the 3-month DSAR deadline on Monday 28 January
2019.
253. Following further exchanges between the claimant and Ms Miller (who was
representing the respondent in the 2018 Tribunal claim) Mr Al-Qasmi sent the claimant
a detailed letter of response dated 28 February 2019. A proposed meeting between
them and Mr Cornwell on 21 February 2019 did not take place. The claimant was by
then signed off as unfit for work until 4 March 2019 due to “Stress and Autism”.
254. Mr Al-Qasmi’s letter noted the wide scope of the claim request. Para 7 of the
letter said an initial search of the email accounts referred to in the DSAR since 2013
using the search term 'Chris' had highlighted 37,738 emails excluding emails for which
the claimant was the recipient or copied into. A wider search across all email accounts
highlighted over 1.6 million items. Widening the search terms to include 'Chris Turner'
and 'CT' and other combinations would give a substantially higher number of results.
Based on that information, the Group’s data protection department had decided to
carry out a mailbox search using the search terms "Chris Turner'' or "Christopher
Turner" for the relevant period but limited to 7 people. They were Mr Joehle, Mr Henzel,
Mr Cornwell, Mr Omerhodzic, Mr Bose, Mr Perez and Mr Martin.
255. The letter noted that the preliminary hearing in the 2018 Tribunal claim on the
21 January 2019 had made clear that disclosure for that case was not yet required.
The DSAR and the process of disclosure for the Tribunal should be dealt with
separately. The fact the claimant was conflating them suggested that his motive was
to seek documentation relating to the Tribunal claim even though he was not entitled
to personal data of others under the GDPR. The letter explained that certain personal
data would not be provided because doing so would adversely affect the rights and
freedoms of other data subjects. The respondent considered that the request to
provide additional personal data over and above what had already been provided was
48

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
manifestly unfounded or excessive. The letter went on to say that, given that the
claimant was the respondent’s data protection co-ordinator and also managed the IT
team in the UK, the fact that he was making a request for personal data in such wide-
ranging terms and involving such a substantial number of Items of data suggested that
the DSAR was made with malicious intent or with an intention to disrupt the
respondent’s business.
256. The letter confirmed that the respondent was prepared to meet with the claimant
to discuss any specific and limited requests for the provision of additional personal
data. Mr Al-Qasmi proposed rearranging the meeting between him, the claimant and
Mr Cornwell so they could discuss any outstanding concerns the claimant had. He
asked the claimant to contact him when he felt well enough to attend. He confirmed
that any additional disclosure resulting from the search of the 7 email accounts would
be provided after detailed review of the results. That would not be until after Mr Al-
Qasmi had returned from annual leave on the 18th of March 2019.
257. A meeting was arranged for 20 March 2019 but had to be postponed because
Mr. Al-Qasmi was ill. The claimant emailed him the following day. He noted Mr Al-
Qasmi’s illness and hoped he would get better soon. He disagreed with a number of
the points made in the 28 February letter. He asserted that the letter showed dubious
logic and “a level of unprofessionalism and bad will”.
258. The claimant said he saw the use of language like “malicious” and “manifestly
excessive” as “an attempt from you to victimise by casting a bad light on my character
and intimidate and resist and harass me as an individual for exercising my information
rights and context of the Tribunal case brought.” He referred to the fact that there had
been a case management order made in the 2018 Tribunal case at the preliminary
hearing on 21 January 2019 requiring disclosure of documents by lists by 3 May 2019.
259. The claimant said that the comments in the letter would not deter him from
pursuing his legal rights nor “intimidate him”. The claimant set a final deadline of 12
April 2019 by which “all information had to be handed over”. If the deadline was
missed, he would write to the ICO to lodge a complaint. He ended by saying that he'd
set up a meeting in his office on the 1 April, having checked Mr Al-Qasmi's availability
in his outlook calendar. That meeting was to “have a detailed discussion on the
information the company will disclose and the practicalities of handover before 12 April
2019”.
260. Mr Al-Qasmi forwarded that email to Mr Cornwell who responded to Mr Al-
Qasmi making it clear he was unhappy with the claimant spending work time on his
Tribunal claim given the claimant’s own assertions that the IT department was under
resource stress. He refuted the allegation of “harassment, victimisation, intimidation”
and said that was simply not true. He felt the harassment was the other way round.
261. The claimant sent a further e-mail to Mr Al-Qasmi on the 22 March. It
criticised the search terms used to date. He provided what he referred to as “additional
justification” for adding back the 14 people or categories from the original DSAR whose
mailboxes the Group had decided not to include in the email search. The justification
in each case was extremely brief. It did not provide a clear rationale for thinking that
the person concerned had any relevant personal data beyond their roles in the
respondent or Group. For example, for the “Group HR” category the justification was
said to be “Communications relevant to [the claimant]”.
49

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
262. Mr Al-Qasmi was still off sick. He forwarded that second e-mail to Mr
Cornwell and said that he did not feel comfortable meeting with the claimant on his
own. He suggested they both meet with him when the claimant was back from leave
so they could agree a way forward which kept all parties happily and hopefully resolved
matters.
263. He pointed out that some of the elements of the DSAR response had been
outside of their control, being dictated by the Group. with the search terms being
agreed by the group. He flagged the demand being placed on the respondent’s HR
Team, which had limited resources. He pointed out that the exercise of responding to
the DSAR had by that point taken nearly 5 months because it was such a wide-ranging
request. There were still a number of emails to review. He also highlighted that the
respondent could not give the claimant the electronic access to data he was seeking
because the respondent needed to protect the personal data of others which they were
doing by redacting hard copies of the documents.
264. Mr Cornwell responded to Mr Ql-Qasmi the same day, expressing his
agreement and support. He said that Mr Al-Qasmi had a right not to be bombarded
with emails by the claimant when off sick. That was only fair given that the respondent
had not bombarded the claimant with emails while he was off sick. He agreed that
there should be more than one person present at the meeting with the claimant and
that “an element of pushback was required”. He agreed that at the claimant could not
have the documents electronically because of the need to redact them. The claimant
could also not also change his search terms causing significant additional work which
was taking focus away from running the business. Mr Cornwell acknowledged that the
claimant was entitled to his data and that the respondent was doing all in his power to
give him it. But, he said, the claimant needed to be reasonable and not keep pushing
for more.
265. Mr Al-Qasmi emailed the claimant on 27 March. He advised him that the
1 April was not suitable for him and suggested meeting on 3 April instead. He totally
refuted the claimant’s suggestion that he had acted in a way which could amount to
an attempt to “victimise”, “intimidate”, “resist” or “harass” him. He pointed out that the
terms “malicious” and “manifestly excessive” in his letter of 28 February were terms
from the GDPR and ICO Guidance. We find that is the case.
266. Mr Al-Qasmi told the claimant that in light of his allegations he was not
comfortable meeting the claimant on a 1:1 basis so Mr Cornwell would also attend the
meeting. He made clear that the purpose of the meeting was to discuss the DSAR only
and not the issue of wider disclosure for the 2018 Tribunal claim which was being dealt
with by Ms Miller.
267. The meeting took place on 3 April 2019. It does not appear that notes were
taken. On 4 April the claimant sent Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi an email
summarising their discussion (p.364). It records they agreed a staged handover of
data, the first being due on 12 April. The claimant confirmed that if there was “not much
further delay and I am kept in the loop regularly on process” he saw no need to
escalate matters to the ICO “right now”.
268. From that email it appears there was a discussion at the meeting of the
response to the DSAR request, specifically to the reference in the 28 February letter
to the request having a malicious intent. The claimant characterised that as a
50

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
seemingly retaliatory approach to his 2018 Tribunal claim. The claimant said that
response was one he “would suggest is inappropriate and should be avoided in the
future” and that “an employee voicing his feelings to HR” was “a chance to calm and
resolve things, not a time to up the ante.” He also asserted that when a Tribunal claim
had been launched “the complaint is protected in law and a hardening of approach
and language to the employee in non-related matters after this point, will be considered
victimising.”
269. Mr Cornwell accepted that he made a comment in the meeting about being
“tired” with things being about the claimant all the time. We find that the context was
the frustration he felt that the claimant’s constant challenging of decisions he did not
agree with, rejection of criticism and the way in which he pursued the DSAR was
diverting resources and energy from running the respondent’s business, involving as
it did a great deal of his time and that of Mr Al-Qasmi and his team. In his email the
claimant said he was “hurt and demoralised” by that remark. He also said it did not
install much confidence in his career prospects given it was his line manager who held
that viewpoint. The claimant linked the remark to his autism, suggesting that his
behaviour was “centred around [his] own unique world view rather than social
dynamics, I cannot change this core default.” He suggested Mr Cornwell should now
be aware of that. He referred to the stress of ”working in a world of the more
Neurotypical” which he accommodated and adapted to the best he could.
270. He said that even from his understanding of social etiquette, he would not
tell his reports or peers that he was “tired” of them, To do so would be to be degrading,
and he found it offensive and patronising when Mr Cornwell directed it to him,
especially when he was aware of his condition. He said that if Mr Cornwell’s patience
was exhausted that was not “a matter he could take lightly” and raised “deep
concerns”. He closed by saying that “It is important that you have the capacity to do
the job and to work with a diverse workplace and see me positively beyond my
disability”.
The December 2018 expenses incident
271. In mid-December 2018, the respondent held a 2-day management meeting in
London. As a thank you to his direct team for their efforts during the year, Mr Cornwell
took them out for a meal at the Savoy. The event included pre-dinner drinks. By way
of a further thank you, Mr Cornwell had also sent his direct team (including the
claimant) a Christmas hamper.
272. The claimant had a meeting with Mr Omerhodzic in London the following day
so stayed overnight in a hotel. On 7 January 2019 he submitted an expenses claim for
that evening. It included 2 meals and drinks, together totalling £138. Mr Cornwell had
put in place a new process for approving expense claims by his direct reports. He
approved the claim but emailed the claimant about it. That email was not in the Bundle
but we find Mr Cornwell advised the claimant in it that he considered the £138 claim
was excessive and questioned why 2 meals had been claimed for 1 night. He copied
the email to Diane Coupe (Mr Coupe’s wife) who was the respondent’s Accounts
Administrator. Mr Cornwell’s evidence was that he did so to confirm that the claim was
approved and that he had already challenged the expenditure in it. We accept his
evidence that that was the process he followed with all his team.
51

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
273. The claimant’s response to Mr Cornwell’s email was a “letter of complaint” to
Mr Cornwell dated 9 January 2019. It was addressed “Dear Sir” and started with a
request that the letter be added to his personnel file. That was because it recorded his
desire to “formally opt out” of receiving any hospitality such as food and drink and other
unsolicited gifts from the respondent. He would continue to claim expenses for travel
and accommodation but would pay for his own food and drink.
274. The claimant accepted that it was Mr Cornwell’s prerogative to challenge
expense claim but said that “more thought should have been applied before [Mr
Cornwell] did so”. The claimant provided his justification for the claim, namely that he
had an early meal and wine in his room when he arrived at the hotel but still felt hungry
and had therefore gone down and had a further meal and drinks later in the evening.
He suggested his claim was far less than the cost of the meal at the Savoy arranged
by Mr Cornwell and what he referred to as “drinks served in the nightclub” which he
understood was “extremely expensive”. He suggested he should have been allowed
to claim more because he had not drunk the “expensive alcohol” served at the Savoy
event.
275. He also asserted that Mr Cornwell’s challenge was a change in approach which
he “inevitably connected” with his grievance and the 2018 Tribunal claim. Referring,
we find, to Mrs Coupe being copied in the claimant said that “any attempt to include
others indiscreetly or unnecessarily in the correction of myself will be perceived by
myself a mechanism of social manipulation to attempt to create a consensus of ill will
towards me.”
276. In parts, the letter appeared to be from both the claimant and his wife, referring
to their both being “culturally deeply offended”. It referred to his wife’s Greek Cypriot
cultural heritage which required that hospitality and food received must be rejected or
returned unless given with goodwill. In view of that, he could no longer accept food
and drink and hospitality. He withdrew any food expenses from his December
expenses claim. He also said he and his wife had decided to pay £200 back to the
respondent to reflect the cost of the Savoy meal and the hamper.
277. He concluded the letter by saying he was not a “scrounging employee with
lavish expectations abusing his expenses provision and hoping to get away with it but
an individual of high worth, integrity and importance to the respondent who had given
many years’ service. For that reason, he said, he “Chose dignity over anything offered
without good will”.
278. We find the letter was an extraordinary one for an employee to send to their line
manager in relation to an objectively surprising expense claim involving 2 meals in one
night for one person. One of the claimant’s issues was that Mr Cornwell had copied
his email to Mrs Coupe. He suggested Mr Cornwell should instead have had a quiet
word with him. He did not feel he had been given the “dignity he deserved” particularly
given that Mr Cornwell was well-aware of the issues he had with Mr Coupe’s “dealing
with [his] disability and enablement of [his] career ambitions”.
279. The Claimant and Mr Cornwell met to discuss this issue on 10 January 2019. It
was a lengthy meeting lasting about 90 minutes.
280. Mr Cornwell emailed the claimant a summary of the meeting and points agreed
that same day, copied to Mr Al-Qasmi (p.327). It is clear from Mr Cornwell’s email that
52

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
he was frustrated by the time taken by what he viewed as a trivial matter. He reminded
the claimant that in dealing with the expenses claim he was doing the job he was
employed to do which included leading a team, ensuring a process was followed and
closely monitoring finances. He said that the claimant’s comparison of his expense
with the Savoy meal was both unfair and inaccurate. There had been no “nightclub”
involved and the cost per head of that evening was £125, less than the amount claimed
by the claimant for the following evening.
281. They discussed the claimant’s rejection of the hamper. Mr Cornwell expressed
his upset that the claimant had not thanked him for the gift. The claimant said he was
socially unaware that he should thank someone for a gift. We find that unconvincing.
Even if the claimant was not intuitively aware that it was customary to thank someone
for a gift, there was evidence elsewhere of his awareness of his learning what social
etiquette required in certain circumstances (e.g. his email to Briita on 14 April 2019)
and we find it implausible that the claimant did not know that it was customary to thank
someone for a gift.
282. We find Mr Cornwell was unconvinced by that and annoyed that the claimant
seemed to be criticising him for not having an intimate knowledge of [the claimant’s]
wife’s Greek Cypriot culture” while himself denying knowledge of a basic cultural norm
like saying thank you for a gift. Mr Cornwell also expressed his concern about the
claimants wife's apparent involvement in the matter, given that she was not an
employee of the claimant.
283. After what Mr Cornwell referred to as “much discussion” the claimant revealed
that his major upset was about the email to him being copied to Mrs Coupe. While
confirming that that was the process he followed with all of his team members, Mr
Cornwell conceded that, with the claimant circumstances in mind, he should have
made an adaptation and reviewed the situation with him prior to involving Mrs Coupe.
He conceded that he would ensure that in future he would discuss matters with the
claimant in the first instance.
284. The claimant for his part conceded that refusing all sustenance at business
events could become very awkward and costly for him and agreed to accept meals
provided as part of business events. Moving forward, the claimant would decide what
he claimed as expenses on a day-to-day basis.
285. Mr Cornwell confirmed that the respondent would not accept any money the
claimant and his wife wanted to refund but would instead hold it securely until such
time as they decided what they'd like to do with it. He urged the claimant to reconsider
the desire to reject gives and business expenses reimbursement in this way.
286. Mr Cornwell closed his email by saying that:
“At this point I add that I find the constant challenge and lengthy push back from
you on matters related to what is basic business process difficult to manage. At
times I feel uncomfortable managing you and often feel unable to challenge you
on business related matters for fear of upsetting you and causing an inordinate
amount of additional follow up work.”
The “York” incident
53

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
287. In January 2019 an issue arose about a problem in the system which checked
stock prices in one of the respondent’s major contracts, York. At around 9.15 a.m. on
Friday 25 January, Mr Coupe raised a “Ticket” about the issue with a “Very High”
priority via the UK IT Support inbox (p.339). He emailed the claimant a few minutes
later to ask him to get someone to answer the ticket and put Mr Cornwell in the picture
asap. In a follow-up exchange Mr Coupe confirmed he had let Mr Cornwell know there
was a problem with York pricing and estimated that the impact on the 2018 figures
was around £40,000. At 10:06 the claimant emailed Mr Cornwell to confirm the issue
was under “immediate and priority investigation” and that he was confident they would
be able to identify the cause.
288. Mr Cornwell responded to stress the importance of the issue for the respondent
and the Group. The estimated £40,000 error would represent 5% of the EBIT for 2018
and had various knock-on effects including putting employee bonuses at risk. He
expressed frustration that the work he and Mr Coupe had done to ensure the EBIT
targets were met and that staff would get bonuses might be wasted because of what
appeared to be a system failure. He also reminded the claimant that in their discussion
at the end of 2017 about his bonus targets the claimant had argued it was unfair for
his bonus to be heavily linked to the EBIT because the IT team had limited effect on
it. Mr Cornwell said this issue “very clearly demonstrates that they have”. He asked
the claimant to find the route cause so they could talk about next steps early the
following week. He also referred to a potential issue relating to a contract in Ireland.
289. The claimant had not responded by mid-morning on Tuesday 29 January so Mr
Cornwell sent a chasing email. He expressed his disappointment that the claimant had
not reported back to him on the cause and remedies. He said he had understood that
the cause had been identified on Friday and that a member of the IT team had worked
on a solution over the weekend but had heard all that third hand. He told the claimant
he had set a meeting on Thursday 31 January for the 2 of them and Mr Coupe to fully
discuss the issue and of problems which had been raised regarding Ireland.
290. The claimant responded by email within 20 minutes to say the matter was still
under investigation and that he had assumed they would discuss at an already
arranged Issues log meeting. He was happy to discuss Ireland but asked Mr Cornwell
to raise the issues he wanted to discuss in advance.
291. He then reminded Mr Cornwell of his long track record of good performance,
said that his condition meant that he needed assistance in setting priorities at times
and with communications, pointed to the resource constraints he was under and
reiterated his need for clarity. He closed his email by saying that he had observed
through documents disclosed that there had been a “distinct shift in the way things are
discussed between you and [Mr Coupe] regarding me since my grievance and claim
to the tribunal”. He went on to say that he was
“…very aware of any attempts to “manage me out” and would not like you to fall
into this pattern between you both as this will be victimisation. In addition, [Mr
Coupe] may still be readjusting to these circumstances and indeed may not be
privy to all the nuances of the adaptions I need. So, in all discussions and in all of
[Mr Coupe’s] or any other staff escalations, I would urge you to keep balanced
and objective with these factors in mind and present your communications in a
balanced way to minimise the stress I currently feel which is affecting my health.”
54

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
292. We find that Mr Cornwell was frustrated by that response. He pointed out that
his email on Friday had been very clear that they would need to discuss the York issue
“early” in the week, i.e. before Thursday. He utterly refuted the assertion of
victimisation in the claimant’s last paragraph. He explained he was copying his email
to Mr Al-Qasmi because it was very much an HR matter.
293. He told the claimant that his management style was different to Mr Coupe’s. He
expected urgency and explanations where customers were let down. As the
respondent’s Managing Director, he had a duty to seek out the causes of issues when
customers were let down. In this case it was particularly urgent and important because
the combined impact of the York and Ireland issues were around £45,000, around 5%
of the respondent’s 2018 EBIT. As the issue appeared to lay within the IT department
for which the claimant was ultimately accountable, so it was to him Mr Cornwell needed
to speak to decide the resolution to the issue.
294. The meeting did take place on 31 January 2019 but we had no detailed
evidence about what happened at them. The following day the claimant saw his GP
and was signed off as unfit for work for 4 weeks due to “Stress and Autism”.
The claimant’s bonus for 2018
295. On 12 March 2019, Mr Cornwell wrote to the claimant to confirm his bonus for
2018. The claimant emailed back to ask for 2 points to be checked. The first issue was
a misunderstanding because of wording used in the email and was resolved quickly.
The second issue was that there had been a reduction to the bonus because of what
the claimant said was a disability related illness in 2018. The claimant asserted this
would constitute discrimination. When Mr. Al Qasmi returned from leave on 18 March
2019, Mr Cornell reviewed that issue with him. They emailed the claimant to confirm
that the relevant absence was recorded as being due to “work related stress.” Because
the fit note did not in any way refer to disability, they did not believe that the respondent
had discriminated in taking it into account. However, as an act of goodwill, Mr Cornwell
confirmed that he had instructed that the claimant’s bonus be paid in full.
296. The claimant responded on 20 March to thank Mr Cornwell but went on to
confirm that his absence was disability related and that this was “a very serious matter”
with implications going beyond the bonus payment. He explained why that was the
case. Mr Cornwell responded on 27 March. He reiterated that the claimant’s fit note in
2018 did not refer to his disability but that since the claimant had now confirmed his
absence was related to his disability that had been noted on his personnel file. Mr
Cornwell confirmed that the full bonus entitlement would be paid in and said he
believed that the matter was now resolved.
July 2019 peer review
297. The respondent had a 360-degree feedback process. The feedback for the
claimant was discussed by him and Mr Cornwell at a meeting on 22nd July 2019.
Alongside acknowledging the claimant’s positive contribution, there were some areas
of improvement identified. In summary, they focused on the claimant’s presence in
the office, communication with colleagues about IT along with criticism that he had
cancelled some 1:1 meetings and did not always recognise the efforts of others.
There were also some areas for improvement for the IT team more generally. They
included the team dressing informally when customers were present and engaging in
55

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
“chit chat”. There was also a view that there was a lack of proactive communication
with other teams and an impression that the IT team had no interest or appreciation
of other teams’ needs and the demand on them.
298. The claimant and Mr Cornwell discussed the points raised in an exchange of
emails over the next few days. For example, the claimant agreed that he would look
for opportunities to make face to face contact with colleagues when he was in the
office. It was agreed that Mr Cornwell could inform the claimant’s peers of his
personal circumstances (albeit with no detail) and the agreement for home working
so they could understand his absences from the office.
299. The claimant acknowledged there were definitely aspects of the concerns
about communication which related to his disability and he would always need
assistance with that. He agreed that an IT face to face meeting that Mr Cornwell had
arranged was constructive and confirmed he would reach out for department to
department meetings. He acknowledged the ticket prioritisation system for IT issues
helped address his issues with prioritising. Mr Cornwell confirmed this was an area
he would like the claimant and he to keep working on but would support in any way
that he could. They had already arranged follow up meetings to discuss this.
300. When it came to the IT Team culture, the claimant agreed that it was informal.
Mr Cornwell made it clear that as long as the work got done and deadlines were hit,
he was happy for people to have fun along the way. There were clearly frustrations
from other departments about communication with the IT team. It was seen as being
all one way, the impression being that the IT Team had no appreciation of wider
business challenges and opportunities. He suggested that they continue to work on
integration into the wider teams, driving communication and feeling that people could
approach the IT team with issues.
301. The claimant did not recognise all the points made in the feedback, e.g. about
cancelling meetings and not recognising the efforts of others. Mr Cornwell made it
clear that while he would like the claimant to bear those other points in mind,
focussing on addressing concerns about his presence and communication would
cause greater impact.
302. One criticism of the claimant discussed was of his being on his laptop in
meetings. Mr Cornwell acknowledged that the claimant was not the only one to use
his laptop in meetings but said that he was the most consistent in doing so. Others
didn’t do so in front of visitors. Mrs Deakin had raised a specific incident during a
meeting with an external GDPR consultant when the claimant had been sending
emails (including one about annual leave) on his laptop during the meeting. That was
particularly notable because the claimant was the respondent’s Data Controller so
could be expected to be paying attention during the meeting. The claimant
acknowledged that he did use his laptop in meetings to take notes. He said he felt
that Mrs Deakin had singled him out.
303. In their e-mail exchange Mr Cornwell said he believed the reason that Mrs
Deakin had “singled the claimant out” was that he was the one who had sent such an
e-mail. It had popped up on a colleague’s screen while that colleague was
presenting at the meeting with the external consultant. The consultant had fed back
to Mrs Deakin specifically about that, suggesting it showed the claimant was not
56

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
engaged with the meeting despite being the Data Controller. The claimant’s
response was that he could not “take a subjective assessment of an outside
consultant on my 'engagement' as a basis for raising this point who knows little about
me personally and how I operate (and there is a lot to know).”
304. The claimant and Mr Cornwell agreed the use of laptops in meetings was a
management team cultural point and that a protocol defining when such use was
appropriate was needed. They agreed they would discuss that point at the next
management meeting. Mr Cornwell made it clear that note taking during meetings
was 100% acceptable (maybe after confirming that that was what was being done).
He also made it clear that sending emails about annual leave and other trivial matter
matters that the participants in the meeting could see was not acceptable.
305. We accept the claimant’s evidence that, overall, the tone of the exchanges was
positive and constructive. Mr Cornwell forwarded the exchange to Mr Al-Qasmi.
The 17 September 2019 meeting and its aftermath
306. On 17 September 2019 there was a meeting at which the progress of an IT
project had been challenged. Mr Cornwell saw it as critical because they had been
getting numerous customer complaints due to lack of progress which raised the risk
of losing a significant contract. There had been complaints of there being little
constructive response from the IT team. The meeting had been, in Mr Cornwell’s
words, “quite a direct meeting”. He had expressed his dissatisfaction with progress
and asked the claimant to urgently progress the project to a satisfactory conclusion.
We find the claimant had found the meeting particularly stressful because he felt he
had had no warning of the issue in advance of the meeting.
307. At 22:39 that evening the claimant sent Mr Cornwell a short e-mail headed
“today's meeting”. It said:
“I want to talk about today's meeting.
Please set up a call”.
308. Mr Cornwell found the tone of that email unreasonably abrupt and aggressive.
In his email in response he confirmed that as a courtesy and to avoid stress he was
responding during working hours, “a position [they] had both committed to several
months previously”. He said that he “assume[d] from the tone of your email below
that you are issuing your line manager and the Managing Director of the UK
organisation with a direct order as opposed to politely requesting further
discussions?” (p.412). He confirmed “regardless of the tone” he was happy to meet.
He had intended to set up a 1:1 meeting to discuss a couple of issues raised with
him recently. He would look for a slot in the next 48 hours for them to meet.
309. In his email, Mr Cornwell set out brief details of the issues he would like to
discuss. The first was a complaint from the respondent’s Sales Director that the
claimant had argued with him during a meeting in front of subordinates. That ran
contrary to the agreement between the senior leadership team that if they disagreed,
they would do so behind closed doors in a management meeting and agree on a
united front in front of their teams. Mr Cornwell said he would like to “understand
57

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
your aggression on that day and talk to you about why we should not behave in that
manner in front of more junior colleagues.” The second issue was Mrs Deakin
reporting that when she had challenged the claimant by email about delays on an IT
project that was overdue, the claimant had responded in a challenging and
aggressive manner. Mr Cornwell said that the claimant’s response by email and in
the phone call that followed was “extremely aggressive”. In that response, the
claimant had criticised Mrs Deakin for emailing rather than picking up the phone. Mr
Cornwell said he would like to understand that challenge a little more because the
claimant had always asserted that he would prefer written communication because
he found that easier to assimilate than verbal communication.
310. Mr Cornwell closed his email by suggesting that there was a “pattern of [the
claimant] not accepting challenge in the manner it was intended”. If the claimant felt
someone was challenging him he “often respond[ed] with aggression and very
lengthy counter-arguments.” He said that the claimant’s challenge was “often seen
by the recipient as disrespectful” and that “[Mr Cornwell] would like to try to
understand this more”. We find that was a reasonable assessment of the situation
and reflected the feedback Mr Cornwell received form the claimant’s colleagues.
311. The claimant responded the same morning by e-mail. He said that Mr
Cornwell’s assumption about his tone was incorrect. Rather than writing a lengthy e-
mail in response he had decided to “constructively divert” that compulsion into a brief
request for a call. He said he was attempting to navigate his disability and Mr
Cornwell was taking offence. Mr Cornwell and others were, he said reading things
into his communications which were not intended because of his disability. He
refuted any claims of “aggression” on his part and attributed that to the perception of
those witnesses who were not aware of his disability. Mr Cornwell would have to
substantiate the allegation with evidence because the claimant found it “quite
shocking” considering the swearing and so-called robust communications which he
said he had received from Mr Cornwell. If he had been misunderstood by those
unaware of his condition the claimant said he was happy to participate in the process
of helping them understand his true intent.
312. He asserted that Mr Cornwell had been “presented with a unique opportunity
to understand autism in a high functioning individual” and had instead chosen “to
forget all you have learned or that has been presented for your understanding of [the
claimant’s] disability”.
313. The claimant explained that he had felt very unwell after the meeting the
previous day. He identified one of the main reasons for that as the introduction of a
whole new agenda point of priority IT tickets without prior notice. The claimant had
had to defend his position but being unprepared created immense stress for him. He
said they had discussed many times the importance of his not being surprised with
new points of critical importance. He also referred to “to the dynamic of the meeting”
causing him stress, details which he said he would discuss at a future point.
Receiving Mr Cornwell's e-mail had caused his stress too “rocket” and had
”shattered” his emotions. He said he could forgive others if they were truly
uninformed but was highly critical of Mr Cornwell’s “lack of personal understanding”
given his knowledge of the claimant’s disability. The claimant said that “I will have to
take the day off to rest as a sick day linked to my disability”.
58

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
314. Mr Cornwell said he was sorry to hear the claimant was unwell and said if
there was anything he or Mr Al-Qasmi could do to help, the claimant should just ask.
The meeting arranged on 19 September did not take place because of the claimant’s
absence.
The claimant’s 20 September email, 30 September meeting and outcome
315. The claimant returned to work on 20 September. He sent Mr Cornwell and
Mr Al-Qasmi an email on that date setting out his position. He the expressed
frustration and hurt that the correct adaptations and understanding were not in place
resulting in a detriment to his health. He said that he had role to play in the Group
but that was “being frustrated by this local ineffectuality”. Although he still felt
trepidation he had decided to “press on for now and give Hartman further opportunity
to adjust”.
316. In response to Mr Cornwell's request for him to let him and Mr Al-Qasmi
know anything they could do to support the claimant he set out five bullet points.
They focused on the respondent taking steps to understand and adapt to the
claimant’s condition. The claimant said that there “must also now be an intervention
that goes beyond the respondent and local HR” because it was clear that so far his
condition was not yet understood. He said he would be seeking that intervention
through the channels available to him. (It is not clear what the claimant meant by
this, but we find the claimant had in mind some form of intervention presumably
involving senior Group management). The claimant also said the respondent must
engage in ongoing specific measures to gain external ongoing support in
understanding the claimant’s condition with those disclosed before disclosure was
widened. He suggested he was open to such wider disclosure. He suggested there
were many routes available including training resources such as the National Autistic
Society and ACAS.
317. In terms of reasonable adaptations, he identified communication support,
constructive mentoring, changing the dynamic of meetings, being given time to
prepare, moderating others’ expectations and accommodation of different
communication styles both written and verbal.
318. The claimant also asked Mr Cornwell to “review your feelings to see if this
has become ‘personal’ for you. He suggested Mr Cornwell “may need support to
understand that your authority is not under threat, you are not being personally
disrespected and that your feelings can be managed to deal with my disability
logically.”
319. The claimant said that his current perception was that he was being
managed out and that there was a change in management approach since his
grievance and his claim. He summed up by saying that his health was his primary
concern with the second being to “work in dignity with purpose under legal,
compassionate and caring conditions”. He said that he would evaluate each day his
position on these two points but the respondent and the Group could have a great
deal of influence over that and he “hoped to see improvement”.
320. The claimant, Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi met on Monday 30 September
2019. The claimant’s perception was that Mr Cornwell was very defensive, refusing
59

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
to consider he might be at all biased or emotional in relation to the issues the
claimant had raised and bemoaning the time the claimant took to manage. However,
the claimant viewed the meeting as a helpful and open discussion about the issues.
He felt that they all made an effort to understand each other’s perspectives and that
they had made some real progress.
321. In an email on 2 October, Mr Cornwell thanked the claimant for what he also
thought was a constructive and helpful conversation. He took the opportunity to set
out his response to the points made in the claimant’s emails on 18 and 20
September 2019, making it clear that this was not meant to reopen the debate. He
made his comments by annotating the claimant’s emails of 18 and 20 September.
322. He rejected the suggestion that he, or the respondent, had failed to make
adaptations or shown understanding of the claimant’s disability. He pointed out that
colleagues to whom disclosure had not been made had no way of understanding any
impact of his disability on his communication style. Wider disclosure could alleviate
the stress that resulted when the claimant felt where there were communication
misunderstandings.
323. Mr Cornwell set out a number of adaptations which he said the respondents
had made. They included formalising the claimant’s working from home
arrangements, allowing him to work 2-3 days per week from his home Office, moving
him to an office with natural light, changing his reporting line from Mr Coupe to Mr
Cornwell, agreeing the claimant did not have to attend management meetings on
various occasions to avoid the stress travel caused the claimant and giving him a
bonus out of cycle for work on Halo (despite it being delivered out of timeline). We
find the respondent had done these things, although the claimant disputed they had
all been done as adjustments because of his autism.
324. When it came to communication, Mr Cornwell said that in recognition of the
claimant’s need to be prepared, he emailed him details of meetings up front where
that was possible. He pointed out that was not always possible in a fast-paced
working environment where sometimes emergencies occurred and rapid discussion
was needed. He also referred to his concession about not copying in Mrs Coupe
arising from the 2019 expenses issue in recognition of the claimant’s strong need for
hierarchy.
325. Mr Cornwell’s position was that he made adaptations. Referring to the extent
of kickback when he challenged the claimant, he said that other members of his
management team would have come under much greater scrutiny and pressure but
that he had made allowances for the claimant due to his greater understanding of the
way he worked. (We find that was the case). That was despite that causing Mr
Cornwell a great deal of challenge as he balanced the claimant’s needs with those of
his peers and of the business. Mr Cornwell completely refuted the “gross
generalisation” that there was “local ineffectuality”, pointing to far more processes
being in place, greater interdepartmental alignment and communication at an all time
high. That had resulted in high staff retention and performance in terms of revenue
growth ahead of its competition.
326. Mr Cornwell addressed the claimant’s 5 bullet points of adjustments. He said
that if the claimant still felt intervention beyond the UK team was required, he would
60

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
be happy to discuss that with the claimant. They had discussed that disclosure to the
wider management group would very possibly result in much more understanding
and Mr Cornwell confirmed that they would be very willing to bring in external support
or training or advice to help the wider management team to understand more. In
terms of training Mr Cornwell said that those to whom the claimant had already made
disclosure had liaised with Aspiedent (the claimant’s own choice of autism specific
OH adviser). In relation to communication, he said that unfortunately they could not
be “perfect all the time”. There were times when they needed to have a challenging
conversation, e.g. where a timeline had been missed, or when they could not allow
the claimant the time he would like to prepare because of a business critical
situation. Moderating others’ expectations was difficult without wider disclosure
because those peers who were unaware of the claimant’s disability had an
expectation of clear and open communication and commitment to hit timelines and
meet commitments. Without wider disclosure it was very hard to moderate those
expectation without it appearing that Mr Cornwell was being lenient on the claimant
while keeping pressure on the peers’ performance. Mr Cornwell reiterated that, as he
said at the meeting, this was not a personal matter at all. He acknowledged he found
their working relationship extremely challenging. He needed to be able to challenge
his direct reports so that they met their commitments to the Group.
327. Mr Cornwell rejected the suggestion that the claimant was being managed out
(something discuss at length at the meeting). He pointed to the advanced
negotiations with regard to the new global OneIT role aimed at the claimant’s
specialism as evidence to the contrary. He also rejected the claimant’s suggestion
that he was being managed differently to how he was prior to lodging his grievance.
Mr Cornwell pointed out that he had not been the claimant’s manager prior to his
lodging his grievance. He said that he had a very strong drive to see the respondent
be successful which is why he had a focus on delivering projects on time. He argued
that he did adapt the way he applied pressure to the claimant. He accepted that the
importance of health. He pointed out that he felt that the respondent was a caring
compassionate organisation and there were many examples of that to draw from
including giving the claimant time away from work at to sort out family matters.
Events from November 2019 to the end of 2020 – the “Ferrari/Ford Fiesta incident,
2020 pay increase, bonus for 2019, 2020 Development Dialogue, concerns about
exclusion from UK IT matters and request for continued adaptations and home
working.
328. On 11 November 2019 the claimant withdrew the 2018 Tribunal claim on agreed
terms set out in a COT3 Agreement. His role remained the same. Mr Bose was still
his line manager on functional issues. Mr Cornwell was still his line manager for
Legal/HR issues.
The Ferrari/Ford Fiesta incident
329. On 4th December 2019 there was an e-mail exchange between Mr Cornwell
and the claimant about a project which was due to launch imminently. Mr Cornwell
raised his concerns that the project had not been delivered according to the agreed
timeline. He was concerned that IT was seeking to design the perfect system rather
than one which would be good enough. He expressed the view they were “trying to
design a Ferrari when a Ford Fiesta would do!!”. The claimant responded at 17:31 to
61

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
say that the UK IT Team were seasoned professionals and suggested the issue was
a lack of clarity about what the business required. Mr Cornwell responded at 18:38 to
point out that the claimant and the UK IT team had been involved in the project since
day one to ensure clarity about the specification and requirements. They had been
very clear about what was needed and not needing a perfect system so as not to put
stress on the UKIT team. He believed it was the quest for the perfect system which
had hampered progress and had “once again” led to a risk of missing of key project
milestone.
330. The claimant responded at 19:07. He opened by saying that Mr Cornwell was
emailing “well beyond post work hours breaking [Mr Cornwell's] request and
insistence to respect home life”. He was responding because it was difficult not to do
so because of his autism “when we are seeming seemingly unbound now by your
own etiquette”. He said his family time had been disrupted. He said that “to be clear”,
Mr Bose was now his functional manager. He and the UK IT team now worked for
the global OneIT organisation. He said he “had no idea” why Mr Cornwell was
pursuing this point to this level of detail with him because he did not work as an UK
IT manager in his new role. The project was not his, he did not claim ownership of it
nor was he the senior supplier. He suggested that Mr Cornwell was wanting him to
manage UK IT without his having management of the UK IT team. He completely
disagreed with Mr Cornwell's points. His email ended in bold “I would highly advise
you to take this up with (Mr Bose) because right now you are stressing me
out!”.
331. Mr Cornwell forwarded the exchange to Mr Al-Qasmi and Mr Coupe. He said,
“Here we go, I've challenged [the claimant] again. Quite mildly actually (I
believe)…..It would seem I am completely unable to challenge. And I note he's now
copied in [Mr Bose]!”. He asked for their view on whether they thought his challenge
of the claimant was too much. He said that nothing needed to be done but that “I
guess we do need to keep a record of these issues.”
332. Mr Al-Qasmi responded to confirm he believed Mr Cornwell’s emails were
reasonable. He suggested that if the claimant found the situation stressful, they
could explore whether he continued to undertake legal responsibility for the UK IT
Team. Mr Coupe suggested that he had started things by challenging the claimant
quite firmly. The claimant, he said, had been “quite rude, disrespectful and had taken
the umph when challenged”. He thought Mr Cornwell’s email had got to the claimant
because it repeated the comment Mr Coupe had made that the proposed system
appeared over complicated. Mr Coupe’s perception was that the claimant did not
accept that they (as non-IT professionals) were in a position to come to that
conclusion. Responding to Mr Coupe, Mr Cornwell suggested there was an obvious
pattern of everything being fine if they allowed the claimant to do what he pleased
but as soon as they “dare ask questions, disagree or challenge” they got a “barrage
of emails”. However, he said, they had a business to run and had to be allowed to
challenge anyone who was not meeting expectations whether the person liked it or
not.
The claimant’s 2020 pay increase
333. On 10 January 2020 Mr Cornwell wrote to the claimant to confirm that his pay
rise for 2020 would be 2%. With one exception, that was the same as the other
62

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
members of the UK Management Team. It was also in line with the agreed inflationary
pay increase for UK Staff. Mr Cornwell explained that when it came to the claimant,
the pay rise took into account that he was significantly the highest paid Grade 6
employee in the respondent. The claimant’s pay was comparable to that for Grade 7
employees and within the respondent’s top 4% highest earners. Mr Cornwell said he
would be happy to discuss this with the claimant when he was in the office the following
week.
334. The claimant emailed back to express his deep unhappiness at not being given
a merit pay rise. He set out his position in 7 bullet points. At the heart of them was
confusion that the rationale for his pay review was closely linked to the performance
of the UK based respondent, whereas his role was now a global OneIT one. He
expressed confusion about whether he should focus his energies on global priorities
or on increasing UK EBIT. He said they need to “pin this down” in the next few days.
He asked Mr Cornwell and Mr Bose to please give him clarity on this, that clarity being
especially important to him (pp.425-427).
The claimant’s bonus for 2019
335. On 12 March 2020 Mr Cornwell wrote to the claimant to confirm the bonus the
claimant and the UK IT Team would be getting for 2019. 60% of the claimant’s bonus
was dependent on the respondent meeting sales and EBIT targets which it failed to
do. The remaining 40% was tied to the claimant’s personal objectives, focussing on
delivery of the HALO project. An award of 100% of that element was made rather than
the potential 150% award the claimant would have received had he reached his
“stretch” targets.
336. The claimant was unhappy about that. He felt passionately that he had reached
his “stretch” targets. In an email to Mr Cornwell, he said he had been “Denied a pay
rise, now denied any stretch bonus modifier, and yet working extremely hard to supply
digital leadership before transition and then after in a supportive facilitating way.” He
disagreed with Mr Cornwell’s reasoning and said he was “not happy” and asked Mr
Cornwell to “please explain the route to appeal”. We find the claimant was the only
employee who challenged their 2019 bonus.
337. Mr Cornwell responded on 13 March to point out that the bonus scheme
expressly said that “irrespective of whether targets are set and agreed, the Board of
Directors are able to moderate performance and could choose to make an adjustment
to any bonus payment due as this would be determined by the overall performance of
the company”. He explained again that 2019 had been a very tough year for the
respondent and they had had to make tough decisions. He said the claimant’s bonus
at 40% compared very favourably with the average of the respondent’s other senior
managers, whose average payout was 23%.
338. The claimant responded the same day to explain why he disagreed. He said
that as an autistic person, being asked to accept that something agreed could be
dismissed on discretionary grounds was a cause of stress. His view was that he had
performed against his “stretch targets”. He should not be penalised or suffer a
detriment because of his transition to OneIT. He had worked in good faith towards
aims for rewards promised and he and Mr Cornwell had been very clear on the goals
set, which he felt had achieved. He accepted that Mr Cornwell’s reply might be to
63

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
reconfirm his position but he asked him to reconsider in light of the arguments the
claimant put forward.
339. Mr Cornwell responded on 17 March. He apologised for the stress caused and
confirmed that was not his intention. He accepted that no one liked to earn less than
they had expected and acknowledged that the claimant’s autism would mean that the
decision was more difficult for the claimant to accept. He explained that given the
extent of the respondent’s shortfall against targets in 2019 they had had to moderate
bonus payments. Others, including Mr Al-Qasmi, had reached “stretch” targets which
should have triggered 150% bonus but had been awarded 100% only after
moderation. He confirmed that the claimant’s bonus was significantly above that of
other members of the SMT. He confirmed his decision in the matter was final.
340. The claimant responded by email on the same day. He had spoken to ACAS
who had recommended that he ask for clarity on a couple of points. The first was what
criteria were applied to decide in individual cases if stretch modifiers would not be
awarded and awards moderated to a maximum of 100% award. The second was
whether it was possible to somehow demonstrate that the criteria had been applied
consistently. The claimant said that any help Mr Cornwell could offer in understanding
that better might help to resolve the claimant’s concerns.
341. There was a brief hiatus in the email exchange because of the need for Mr
Cornwell to focus on the impact of the COVID pandemic and associated lockdowns.
Having discussed with Mr Bose, on 8 April 2020 Mr Cornwell emailed the claimant to
confirm that he had re-considered the award and the claimant’s bonus would be
increased to 125% of the personal objective part of his bonus, amounting to an
additional £819. In his email he acknowledged that the claimant did express some
valid points but explained that the decision to moderate the bonus of members of the
senior UK team was never based on individual performance but on the respondent’s
poor performance in 2019. The claimant’s bonus even before the increase to 125%
was significantly higher than the claimant’s UK peers. In the main the moderation only
affected the senior team because they felt that as a team, they needed to show
leadership by accepting the outcomes of poor performance.
342. The claimant responded the same day to confirm that that closed the matter for
him. The reconsideration, he said, was motivating because it gave him greater
confidence going forward with his goals in 2020.
343. Mr Cornwell emailed Mr Coupe and Mr Al-Qasmi to confirm his decision to
reconsider “after much back and forth”. He acknowledged that Mr Coupe would not be
pleased by the decision. Mr Coupe responded that “for someone who has cost the
business so much in the last year, it more than sticks in the throat”. Mr Cornwell said
that he couldn't agree more but that the “hidden costs of all the arguments back and
forth quotes are far more!”.
344. The claimant viewed the outcome as a fair compromise. We find that Mr
Cornwell made the concession reluctantly in order to “defuse” the situation. We find
that he feared the claimant would keep challenging the decision unless he gave in and
was concerned about the expense and time the continued challenge would take,
particularly in the context of the extraordinary challenge presented to the respondent’s
business by the COVID pandemic.
64

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
The claimant’s 2020 Development Dialogue
345. The claimant and Mr Cornwell were due to meet to discuss the claimant’s
“Development Dialogue (i.e. his appraisal) on Wednesday 29 April 2020. This was the
first formal appraisal Mr Cornwell had carried out as the claimant’s manager. The
claimant had not had regular formal appraisals in previous years.
346. On the Monday of that week Mr Cornwell sent the claimant the Development
Dialogue form. Mr Cornwell had scored the claimant as 2/5 (“partially meeting”) for
“Collaboration” and “Role Model”. “Collaboration” and “Communication” were
identified as development needs. His rationale in the form was that although
communication within the claimant’s team and One IT seemed strong, communication
with stakeholders outside those teams needed to be stronger. That included
colleagues in other teams. They had reported lack of communication on progress on
IT projects, tasks or fixes, often reporting that “it feels my task has gone into a black
hole”. Mr Cornwell said that the respondent had often let customers down as a
consequence. There had been constant feedback to the claimant about the need for
communication, particularly around when an IT solution would be delivered. The
claimant’s focus was on the effort and time needed to provide such fixes and deliver
projects, whereas those external to the IT team simply needed to know when they
would be delivered.
347. The claimant emailed in response on the same day. That initial response was
polite, thanking Mr Cornwell for his time in carrying out the appraisal. He confirmed he
would input his self-assessment scores, saying he would “score himself adaptively”.
He referred to the challenges for him as an Autistic person, saying that he may never
be able to meet everyone’s communication and reassurance needs 100% on his own
but would “take pointers and keep trying”. (p.444)
348. The following day. The claimant sent the form to Mr Cornwell and Mr Bose,
having added his self-assessment scores and comments. He scored himself 4/5 or 5/5
for the criteria on the form. The tone of his covering email was markedly different to
that of the previous day. He said he would “write honestly rather than supress”
because that would be damaging to him. He said he felt ”patronised, devalued and
demoralised” by the scores Mr Cornwell had given him which were the lowest he had
ever seen. He said he had not been “scored adaptively”, the scoring not having
considered his disability on social and communication topics. He felt he had been
penalised for those topics whereas otherwise there was excellent performance.
349. He also said that “there was historical management dysfunction in process in
the UK in the unregulated demand process placed upon the IT team”. He said that had
continued in 2019, resulting in conflicting priorities and “free for all escalation to the
MD” which as an Autistic person he had managed as best as possible with an “effort-
based project system that could adapt to this chaos”. He referred to his health issues
which he linked to “stress related to lack of adaption to disability in UK”. He said that
had not been a problem since his new management (i.e. Mr Bose) and since he had
been able to distance himself from “such dysfunctional process in UK demand to some
extent and feel more respected personally”. He made clear that he would not be able
to sign off the Development Dialogue document since he did not agree with the scoring
and comments in it.
65

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
350. Mr Cornwell and the claimant met to discuss on 30 April 2020. The evidence
from both was that the meeting was a helpful, constructive dialogue. They explored
their different perspectives on the claimant’s performance. Mr Cornwell increased the
claimant’s Role Model score from 2/5 to 3/5.
351. Mr Cornwell agreed that if the claimant did not want to sign the form, that was
his prerogative. Instead, he summarised their discussion in an email to the claimant
later that day. The intention was that the email would serve as evidence of that
agreement. Mr Cornwell took the opportunity to respond to the points made by the
claimant in his email of 28 April. in summary, he noted that he and the claimant
disagreed about the notion of “adaptive scoring”. The respondent’s position was that
the tasks should be adapted to the claimant’s needs, but the scoring need not be
adapted. He confirmed that communication was the area where he offered the
claimant constant feedback. He set out the areas he said they had worked on with
regards to communication in light of the claimant’s autism. That included reducing ad
hoc meetings, giving the claimant time to prepare where the needs of the business
allowed and communicating by email as the claimant’s preferred method of
communication. He said they had worked on a process of task prioritisation with the
management team to help manage IT team workload and a weekly update of progress
as a means of driving communication. He and the claimant had had various
conversations over the year for Mr Cornwell to understand the claimant’s barriers to
communication and for Mr Cornwell to help the claimant understand what the
claimant’s “audience” expected in terms of adequate communication. Mr Cornwell
pointed out that other members of the UK team who feel “under communicated” with
had no knowledge of the claimant’s Autism so could not adapt their expectations of
his communication style to take that into account. Mr Cornwell noted that he had on
several occasions asked the claimant to consider limited disclosure of his Autism to
colleagues.
352. Mr Cornwell said the claimant’s reference to “management dysfunction” in the
UK was the claimant’s perspective. Mr Cornwell identified a deep-seated mismatch in
how the UK team saw the need to set deadlines and agree timelines as opposed to
the claimant’s 'effort based' forecasting. When communicating with the internal or
external customer, the effort invested was not as important to them as knowing the
timeline for a project and, when any slippage occurred, feeling adequately
communicated with.
353. The email was cordial in tone as was the claimant’s reply of the same day. The
claimant’s only concern, he said in that reply, was that the scores would not hamper
future development or negatively affect decision making. Mr Cornwell had assured him
that those decisions were for his future management to make based on their
evaluation.
June 2020 - The claimant’s concerns about exclusion from UK IT team matters
354. In early June 2020 the claimant had an email exchange with Mr Al-Qasmi. The
claimant was unhappy that he had not been copied into communications confirming
the promotion of one of his UK IT line reports, Tom Pope (“Mr Pope”) We find that was
a genuine oversight. Mr Al-Qasmi responded to explain that the offer had been made
by OneIT and Group HR. The claimant responded to suggest there was “no logical
reason you would have specifically not informed me of this development.” He went on
66

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
to ask that Mr Al-Qasmi please bear in mind the need to include him in communications
in future. He said that “if I find out I am being systematically or even inadvertently
excluded from information important to my role for whatever reason but that is shared
with another, I will raise this as a formal complaint”.
355. Mr Al-Qasmi forwarded the email exchange to Mr Cornwell saying “another
email from Chris”. He suggested that in future they copy the claimant into any relevant
people communication for IT as the legal manager to avoid a future complaint. Mr
Cornwell agreed, noting on 4 June 2020 there was no reason not to have copied him
in on this occasion. He said that “As ever, [the claimant] Is going on the attack and
making threats, but that's OK. Let’s just copy him in future”.
356. On 5 June the claimant followed up his emails to Mr Al-Qasmi by emailing Mr
Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi, copying in Mr Bose. He expressed concern that he was
not being kept in the loop on matters relating to the UK IT Team despite his being their
legal/HR line report. He suggested that other UK managers were given preference
over him when it came to updates. He ended his email (in bold italics):
357. “Leaving me out of the loop of key information and/or supplying more
influence effectively to another manager in the UK over key decisions or
developments on UK IT staff would be a reneging of the agreements in place
and the negotiated transition into OneIT since Oct 2019.”
358. Mr Cornwell replied to reassure the claimant that not copying him in had been
an oversight. He pointed said that everyone working remotely (due to COVID) may be
part of the reason but that there was no excuse for the oversight. He committed to
copying the claimant into future communications.
359. The claimant replied to raise another concern. He understood that there had
been meetings with IT involving Mr Coupe and IT staff which had excluded him. The
specific example he gave related to the future of the UK phone system. That was
copied to other UK IT team members but not the claimant. He confirmed he had no
issue with Mr Coupe being involved as director but saw no reason why he would not
be copied in. He asked (in bold italics) that he be kept informed as suitable to his role
about UK technology discussions and “not be excluded”.
360. Mr Cornwell responded to explain that it was he, not Mr Coupe, who had sent
an exploratory email about the phone system. He had sent it to Mr Pope, who looked
after that area. He suggested the claimant would be overwhelmed if every email about
exploratory IT issues were copied to him but was happy to do so if the claimant
preferred. The claimant replied to say that he thought his email was ”quite clear” that
if Mr Cornwell was copying Mr Coupe or any IT staff who reported to the claimant
about an important future UK IT technology exploration or architectural topic it was
best if he copied in the claimant as he had now confirmed he would do.
361. The claimant was copied in by Mr Al-Qasmi to the email exchanges about a pay
rise for another of his line reports, Simon Young (“Mr Young”) in June and July 2020
(pp.459-460).
The claimant’s request for continued adaptations and home working agreement
67

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
362. On 19 July 2020 the claimant sent Mr Bose, Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi a 4
page document by email headed “OneIT transition, continued support for [the
claimant]”. It reviewed progress to date and was overwhelmingly positive when it came
to the claimant’s transition to OneIT and his working relationship with Mr Bose. Mr
Cornwell referred to the document as coming “out of the blue”. The claimant’s
document also referred to less positive issues such as the 2019 bonus, pay review
and the Development Dialogue. He pointed out that he had been seeking promotion
since December 2015. He understood that Mr Bose was working on a role for him
which would be a promotion.
363. The claimant set out a number of adaptations that he required in light of his
Autism, focussing on understanding communication issues, e.g. how much detail to
provide, international social politics, formality v informality. He proposed a quarterly
discussion with Mr Bose and Mr Al-Qasmi to explore such topics, minute and take
forward any agreed actions. In his response on 30 July, Mr Cornwell confirmed that
though such meetings were not usual they were happy to put them in place as an
adaptation to address the claimant’s needs.
364. In his document the claimant also requested to work full time from home. He
pointed out that the impact of the pandemic had made home working the norm for far
more people. He noted that Mr Pope was officially a home worker in his new role. Mr
Cornwell said he was willing to agree to the claimant increasing his working from home
but not to his being 100% home working. He agreed to the claimant increasing his
home working subject to his working at least 2 days a month from the office in
Heywood. That requirement to attend the office reflected the fact that the claimant
retained legal management of the UK It team so needed to come into the office to
interact with his team as well as for group IT meetings. Mr Cornwell noted that the
claimant had recently asked to come into the office as a break from home working. He
said Mr Pope was in a different position, having no line management responsibility.
365. Mr Cornwell sent the claimant a letter dated 31 July 2020 to confirm that the
claimant could work from home on a full-time basis, subject to the requirement to
attend the office on 2 days per month. The letter set out an expectation that the
claimant would also attend the office on an ad hoc basis as required, e.g. where his
presence was required at work meetings, or to attend training. There was an
expectation for some international travel aligned with his role and at the request of his
functional line manager.
366. The letter confirmed that the respondent reserved the right to review all flexible
working patterns over time in light of any changes to operational requirements subject
to consultation if there were any proposed changes.
The claimant’s direct communications with Ms Fuenfstueck in 2019-2020
367. The claimant wrote or emailed Ms Fuenfstueck direct on a small number of
occasions in 2019-2020 in addition to the 14 April 2019 when he sent her and Dr
Heinen his letter about the 2018 Tribunal claim.
368. On the 26th of September 2019 the claimant sent Ms Fuenfstueck a one line e-
mail timed at 3:09 a.m. asking what her position was on climate change, She
responded with a brief e-mail to confirm that the Group had decided to define a
68

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
sustainability strategy and thanking the claimant for his concern. The claimant thanked
her for her personal prompt response (page 405).
369. On Sunday the 23rd of February 2020 at around 11:00 p.m. the claimant
emailed Ms Fuenfstueck to express an interest in moving to America if there were any
plans for a digital task force based there. He opened his e-mail by saying “eccentric e-
mail as usual but one might try”. Ms Fuenfstueck asked for time to reply because of
other matters she had to deal with. The claimant explained that his e-mail was more
of an update of his position because he had reached out in the previous year and was
now more settled.
370. On Sunday 6 September 2020 at 6:30 a.m. the claimant emailed Ms
Fuenfstueck asking for a “review of the management performance of the UK”. He said
that he had found matrix management within OneIT refreshing and found “further
purpose and freedom from petty UK politics”. He referred to the fact that a large part
of his bonus was still tied to UK sales and EBIT. He expressed “genuine concern” that,
having seen various management changes over the years “never have I seen such
underperformance versus opportunities”.
371. Ms Fuenfstueck did not respond to that e-mail. On Sunday 1 November 2020
at 2:02 a.m. the claimant emailed her again. He noted the lack of response and said
“It is clear we must support UK, troubled times, what is your offer?”. He went on to say
that he was aware of the huge power imbalance in their communications but “I'm
autistic but not stupid, I want environmentally and ethically creative ways to reach profit
and comfort!!!”.
372. Later that same afternoon the claimant emailed to say that having reviewed his
previous emails he thought his frustration with this and other issues had affected his
communication style. He apologised for his bluntness if perceived that way. He said
he would endeavour to limit his communication with Ms Fuenfstueck as much as
possible and would leave any topics raised now and do what he could himself. He said
that this was a “self review, I have to manage my condition where I can and while not
being too self critical, be prepared to see where I could have worded things better”.
Ms Fuenfstueck thanked him for his note and said that she would reflect on the current
and desired support of the UK.
373. There was no evidence that the claimant had been told that it was inappropriate
for him to contact Ms Fuenfstueck direct either by her or by Mr Cornwell or Mr Bose.
Events from January 2021 to May 2021 – change of role, bonus for 2020 and the
claimant’s pay review request and Mercer data
374. Mrs Deakin was appointed as a statutory director of the respondent in January
2021. The claimant emailed her to congratulate her and wish her every success in her
extended role (p.484).
375. The claimant started a new role in OneIT in early 2021 but he continued to
report to Mr Cornwell for Legal/HR purposes. Mr Bose was his functional line manager
at the start of 2021. Mr Bose left the Group at the end of March 2021. His replacement
as the claimant’s matrix manager in OneIT was Amir Fattah (“Mr Fattah”).
69

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
376. The COVID pandemic had impacted on the respondent’s business in 2020. Its
sales and EBIT were below what they were anticipated to be. That impacted on the
respondent’s ability to award pay rises in 2021 beyond basic, inflation linked pay rises
(p.488).
377. In March 2021 the Group decided not to award its managing directors salary
increases for 2021. Ms Fuenfstueck explained the rationale for that decision in an
email dated 25 March 2021. She referred to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
which had led to very good sales and profits in certain business segments but had had
a negative commercial impact on others. Given the ongoing challenges posed by the
pandemic, increasing cost and competitive pressure the Group was planning for a
decline in revenue and a “strong” decline in profits. That meant being cautious and
keeping a particularly close eye on personnel costs. She asked the management in
the regions to apply the same caution when discussing salary adjustment for their
teams in the upcoming month. She went on to say that starting from the planning
process in 2021 for 2022, the Group would need to get into a much closer global
alignment for planned salary increases based on external benchmark data,
performance and business outlook.
The claimant’s change of role in OneIT
378. At the beginning of 2021 Mr Bose identified a new role in OneIT for the claimant.
In an email on 2 February 2021, Mr Al-Qasmi told Mr Cornwell that the new role was
then still being finalised. Mr Bose had confirmed that it was not a promotion, but
potentially a slight drop in grade but Mr Bose was going to ensure that the claimant
remained at the same grade. Mr Al-Qasmi said that his understanding was that “this
new potential role does not warrant a salary increase”.
379. On 25 February 2021 Mr Bose wrote to Mr Cornwell (copying to Mr Al-Qasmi
and the claimant) to confirm that the claimant was taking up a new role in his team as
Senior Manager Digital Platforms. In that role the claimant would be expected to
develop expertise on Hybris, a niche and business critical area for the respondent. He
would also be responsible for managing a cost centre in Paul Hartmann AG and lead
two people in Germany remotely. Mr Bose described this as adding new dimensions
to the claimant’s current role profile. As a result, Mr Bose recommended that when
the claimant had fully taken up the new role (expected to be the end of May 2021) a
formal pay review should be conducted and actioned. The new role did not result in a
change of line manager for the claimant.
The claimant’s bonus for 2020
380. On 17 and 18 March 2021 there was an exchange of emails between the
claimant and Mr Cornwell about the claimant’s bonus for 2020. The claimant was
concerned because he hadn't been informed of his bonus in the way he had been in
previous years. He had been told by an UK IT colleague that Mr Coupe had rung the
members of the UK IT team individually to tell them their bonus. However, Mr Coupe
had not contacted the claimant. The claimant was concerned that he was being left
out of key communications and that his role as line manager of the UKIT team wasn't
being respected. He said that he felt undermined and “hope[d] there is no motivation”.
We find that to be another suggestion by the claimant that he was being treated
differently because of disability. It seems to us that the claimant was at this point
ascribing any differential treatment which he saw as disadvantageous to him to his
70

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
disability. That applied particularly to the actions of Mr Coupe but also to those of Mr
Cornwell.
381. Mr Cornwell clarified matters the following day, apologising for the “poor
way we have executed this this year”. He explained that there was an issue in that the
Group worked to an April timeline but in the UK bonuses had traditionally paid in
March. He then confirmed that the claimant’s bonus amount was correct. Because the
business had not met sales and EBIT targets in 2020 the bonus for that element would
be £0. The bonus the claimant received reflected the claimant’s performance against
his individual targets as scored by Mr Bose. The claimant found that response “helpful
and responsive”.
The claimant’s pay and request for pay review for his new role
382. The claimant’s new role took effect from 1 March 2021. The claimant ‘s salary
was increased to £75,024 with effect from 1 January 2021. However, there had been
no pay rise linked to the claimant’s new role.
383. The claimant’s new role was confirmed in a variation of contract letter from Mr
Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi dated 4 March 2021. The letter confirmed that once he had
fully transitioned into the role a pay review would take place. On 5 March 2021 the
claimant countersigned that letter to indicate that he had read and accepted the
changes to his terms and conditions (p.503).
384. The claimant’s evidence at the Tribunal hearing was that he and Mr Bose had
agreed a pay rise (rather than a pay review) when he accepted the new role. We do
not accept that.
385. We had no witness evidence from Mr Bose but his e-mail of the 25 February
2021 recommends a pay review rather than a pay rise. That is also what the contract
variation letter of 4 March 2021 said. The claimant counter-signed that letter, signifying
his agreement with its contents. Mr Boyd submitted that given the claimant’s approach
to previous such letters during the transition to OneIT, the claimant would have had
no hesitation in challenging its contents if he thought they did not accurately record
what he and Mr Bose had agreed. We accept that submission.
386. We also find that subsequent events contradict the claimant’s evidence. In May
2021 he asked for a pay review not a pay rise. In the claimant's 2021 formal grievance,
he only went to far as far as suggesting that the failure to give a pay rise was against
the “spirit and intent” of Mr Bose’s recommendation rather than any express
agreement. We accept the claimant’s firm belief was that the pay review would
inevitably result in a pay rise. We do not accept Mr Bose had said that was the case.
Had he done so, we find the claimant would have quoted or at least referred to any
such statement in his communications with the respondent and, in particular, in his
2021 grievance.
387. On 25 May 2021 the claimant emailed Mr Cornwell (copying Mr Al-Qasmi and
Mr Fattah) formally requesting the pay review recommended by Mr Bose.
388. Mr Cornwell’s immediate e-mailed response to Mr Al-Qasmi and Mr Fattah was
that in the current financial climate approving any pay rise would be quite difficult.
However, he said that if there was a genuine need to award an increase because
71

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
someone was underpaid for the role they were performing then they should address
that. He asked Mr. Al-Qasmi to do 2 things. The first was to work with Mr Leiske to
benchmark IT positions within the Group at the claimant’s level. That was to determine
how the claimant’s current salary level and package stacked up against those
positions. The second was to do some work locally in the northwest of the UK to
determine what the claimant could earn in a similar role on the open market. That
would enable them to make a decision based on Group’s average and the local UK
average for a person with the claimant skills and experience.
389. Mr Leiske’s advice was that it was not possible to benchmark positions across
the Group because living standards and rates of pay in each Group country differed
so much. Instead, it was agreed that Group HR that would purchase salary
benchmarking data for the claimant’s role from Mercer for a fee of £700.
390. It was part of the claimant’s case at the Tribunal that the process applied to him
had been “atypical”. Mr Marquard was asked in cross-examination about pay review
practice across the Group. His evidence, which we accept, was that the Group did
obtain global pay data to share with those making pay decisions.
391. Mr Al-Qasmi contacted national recruiters in the UK to see whether they had
any IT salary guides. He also forwarded Mr Cornwell and Mr Fattah an e-mail which
he'd received from an IT recruiter in January 2021. It set out the recruiter’s latest IT
salary and contract rate guide for roles specifically based in the north-west UK area.
The guide suggested a Head of IT/IT Director or Chief Technology Officer would be
on a salary of £75,000, a Chief Information Officer on £98,750 and a Software Architect
on £70,000 (p.550).
392. The discussion was complicated by the fact that, following a Group IT decision
in March 2021, the claimant’s line management responsibilities were due to change
again. Starting from July 2021, 3 members of the UK IT Team were due to transition
wholly or partly from that team to OneIT. The claimant would remain as their “legal”
manager (in the same way as Mr Cornwell was his “legal manager”). However, their
day-to day work and performance would be managed by matrix managers within One
IT. There was a discussion with Group HR about whether the pay review should be
paused pending confirmation of the claimant’s new job description. Mr Cornwell’s view
was that they should obtain the Mercer data in any event so they had it if it was needed.
393. On 15 June 2021 Mr Cornwell emailed the claimant by way of an update. He
confirmed that they were working with the Compensation and Benefits Team in
Germany. He said they would revert to the claimant as soon as they were able.
394. The Mercer data was sent to Mr Al-Qasmi by Ramona Häck (“Ms Häck“) of the
Group’s Compensation and Benefits team on the 23rd of June 2021.
The Mercer data and “comparators”
395. The claimant’s total package (with full bonus) as at the time of the pay review
request was £90,028 with a base salary of £75,024. He was the fourth highest paid of
the respondent’s employees after the 3 statutory directors.
72

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
396. The Mercer data report was dated 21 June 2021. It provided an analysis of
market data based on the role of “senior manager digital platforms” in the UK. It did
not differentiate between compensation packages for different regions within the UK.
In summary it showed the median total compensation package (including bonuses) of
£90,912 with a median base salary of £76,153. The equivalent figures for the 75th
percentile were £108,948 total cash compensation and annual base salary of £95,997.
The equivalent average figures were £91,152 for total cash compensation and
£81,170 for annual base salary.
397. It was the claimant’s case that pay rises were always given on a change of role.
For the respondent, Mr Cornwell’s evidence was that there no rule across the business
that pay rises were automatically given on promotion or when an individual changed
their roles. We find that Mr Cornwell would be better placed to know the position across
the business given his role. It was also the case that the claimant was not given a
salary rise when he transitioned to OneIT in 2019 nor, by definition, was he given one
in 2021 when he transitioned to the role for which he was now seeking a pay rise. We
prefer Mr Cornwell’s evidence on this point and find that pay rises were not
automatically given when there was a change in role.
398. The claimant compared his position with that of Mr Pope and Mr Young.
399. It was not disputed that Mr Pope’s salary increased by around 12% when he
was promoted to the role of Cloud Security Expert within OneIT with effect from 15
July 2020. His bonus also increased to 15% of his salary (if he achieved 100% of
targets). No salary benchmarking data was purchased in advance of the pay rise. The
new role involved Mr Pope taking on a global role reporting to a matrix manager in
Group. We find that Mr Pope lost the ability to earn overtime when he was promoted.
He specifically raised that issue in discussions about that new role and Mr Al-Qasmi
advised that his salary should be increased to offset that (p.605). Group HR accepted
that recommendation.
400. Mr Young transitioned to a role in OneIT with effect from 1 August 2020. He
received a pay rise of around 6.5% with effect from 20 August 2020. No salary
benchmarking data was purchased in advance of the pay rise. Mr Cornwell's
evidence, which we accept, was that although the role was not a promotion it included
additional responsibilities. We also accept Mr Cornwell’s evidence that at that time the
respondent believed that Mr Young was a “flight risk”. We find that the respondent
decided to award him a salary increase to keep him engaged as well as to reflect the
additional responsibilities of his role.
The decision on the claimant’s pay
401. In her email, Ms Häck advised Mr Al-Qasmi that the claimant's current total
yearly pay (i.e. salary plus bonus) of £90,028 was very much in line with the median
in the Mercer data of £90,912 (p.560). on 23 June Mr Al-Qasmi forwarded her email
and the Mercer data to Mr Cornwell, Mr Fattah and Group colleagues. He advised that
based on the market data it looked like at the claimant was paid at the right level.
402. Mr Cornwell was satisfied that the respondent was already paying the claimant
a very fair salary for the role he was performing. However, he said he was unaware
what had been promised by Mr Bose before he left the business. He asked colleagues
in the Group whether they were aware of what Mr Bose had promised. They responded
73

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
to say that they did not have any information about it. All they had to go on was Mr
Bose’s email of 25 February 2021. We accept Mr Cornwell’s evidence that Mr Bose
had not communicated to him that the claimant’s new role merited a pay rise or that
that would be the inevitable outcome of the recommended pay review. We also accept
that Mr Bose had not communicated with Mr Fattah or other colleagues about the
issue.
403. It was agreed that the next step was for Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi to write
to the claimant confirming the decision not to award a pay increase and explaining the
rationale for that decision. The claimant would then be given an opportunity to discuss
the decision with them via Teams. Mr Cornwell agreed that was a better approach than
meeting the claimant first and following up with a written e-mail.
404. At Mr Cornwell’s request, Mr Al-Qasmi prepared a draft email to the claimant
from them both with Mr Cornwell tweaked. Mr Cornwell sent it to the claimant on 28
June 2021 (p.565). It confirmed the decision not to increase the claimant’s salary. It
explained that in reaching that decision that they had sought internal expertise from
the Group’s Compensation and Benefits team and that they had in turn sought external
expertise from Mercer. It explained that based on the Mercer data, the claimant was
paid very much in line with the benchmark for the role he undertook. They
acknowledged that the claimant would be disappointed but said that they also had to
bear in mind the ongoing challenges to the business. They repeated the explanation
in the final paragraph of Ms Fuenfstueck’s email of 25 March 2021 to explain the need
keep a particularly close eye on personnel costs. They thanked the claimant for
reaching out to them and confirmed they were happy to set up a Teams (or face to
face) meeting if the claimant wished to talk to them.
The data protection issue and the claimant’s July 2021 grievance
The data protection issue
405. The claimant replied on the same day to say he was disappointed by the
decision and would like to understand the reasons further. He asked for access to the
Mercer data and the analysis that led to the decision. He said the data was requested
informally rather than as a Data Subject Access Request.
406. Mr Cornwell agreed to look into the claimant's request for the Mercer data. Mr
Al-Qasmi asked Mr Leiske and Ms Häck how they would approach such a request
from a Group employee. Mr Leiske’s view was that it was not helpful to share too much
data with the claimant. He asked Mr Al-Qasmi whether there was any legal reason
requiring the respondent to share the data. Mr Al-Qasmi took legal advice on that point.
Having done so, the respondent’s view was that the Mercer data was not personal
data and there was no requirement to share it with the claimant. It was decided that
the explanation provided already was adequate and reasonable.
407. On 5 July OK Mr Cornwell wrote to the claimant to set out the respondent’s
position. He reiterated the difficult business conditions the respondent was operating
in and explained that the decision they had made was based on the respondent’s
overall ability to pay. The Mercer data was just a benchmark for guidance purposes,
and they did not see the need to scrutinise it further. They did not believe the data was
personal data and were not willing to share it with the claimant. The email confirmed
74

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi’s willingness to meet with the claimant but confirmed
the decision was final and they did not intend to change it.
The July 2021 formal grievance
408. The claimant’s response was to raise a formal grievance on 6 July 2021
(pp.572-574). He emailed it to Mr Al-Qasmi, copying it to Mr Fattah, Mr Cornwell and
other colleagues in OneIT management. We find the claimant believed that Mr
Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi had made their decision because he had in the past
challenged them in relation to pay and career progression and did not want to “give in”
to him. He found the obtaining of benchmarking data “atypical” and believed it was
done merely to back up a decision Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi already wanted to
make.
409. The grievance alleged that the denial of a salary increase was against the spirit
and intent of Mr Bose’s recommendation of a formal salary review. It complained about
the denial of access to the Mercer data. The claimant asserted that there was
precedent for salary increases being awarded to IT staff taking on wider
responsibilities in OneIT since October 2019 but that had not been applied to him. We
find that referred to Mr Young and Mr Pope although the grievance did not refer to
them by name.
410. The claimant alleged he had been subjected to disability discrimination. and
victimisation. The victimisation was because of his previous disability discrimination
claim. The claimant expressed concern that Mr Cornwell had not advocated in a
balanced way for a pay rise but had instead selected the least favourable option to the
claimant from the options available. The claimant asserted there was a continuous
problem with Mr Cornwell in terms of how he viewed the claimant, the nature of his
disability and how he treated the claimant.
411. He set out some of the evidence for that allegation in 4 bullet points:
• What he called “the denial and then backtrack” by Mr Cornwell over his bonus
for 2020 when it was “clear a normalisation of high performance had not been
applied equally in the UK management team”.
• His “imbalanced” 2020 development document by Mr Cornwell which the
claimant alleged was so bad the claimant asked permission not to sign. He
considered it discriminatory because it referred to aspects of his disability as
voluntary factors he could always compensate for, showing a complete and
continued lack of understanding of his disability.
• A spontaneous comment by Mr Cornwell in a meeting with the claimant and Mr
Fattah that it was “no secret” that there have been differences between them.
The claimant said that he had previously kept the interactions with Mr Cornwell
around his disability from Mr Fattah in the hope of putting old matters behind
him. He said Mr Cornwell’s comment in a meeting with Mr Fattah that they were
“no secret” caused him grave concerns that Mr Cornwell was continuing to
“paint [him] in a negative light” with other senior staff.
• That before leaving for his new role Mr Bose informed the claimant that he had
“observed discrimination towards [the claimant]”.
75

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
412. The claimant asked to be informed early if there was categorically no chance of
a change of outcome or even a detailed and balanced consideration so that he could
“proceed with reaching out to ACAS as the next stage”. His final paragraph asserted
his commitment to his role and career and the Group companies and how much he
enjoyed working with OneIT colleagues.
413. Mr Cornwell emailed Mr. Al-Qasmi to say he was “lost for words”. Given that
the grievance made significant accusations against him, he asked Mr. Al-Qasmi to
deal with it. We find Mr Cornwell had anticipated a challenge to the refusal of a pay
rise but felt that they had robust data from Mercer to back up that decision. We find he
was genuinely bemused about the allegations of discrimination and victimisation. We
find that he thought the 2019 bonus and 2020 Development Dialogue issues had been
resolved to the claimant’s satisfaction and he genuinely did not understand the
allegation of ongoing victimisation.
The grievance process and outcome
414. Mr Al-Qasmi asked Mrs Deakin to hear the grievance. He considered her
impartial because she had not been involved in managing the claimant and had had
no involvement in the matters referred to in the grievance. By the time she heard the
grievance Mrs Deakin was aware of the claimant’s Autism diagnosis.
415. A grievance meeting was set up all for 19 July 2021.Mr. Al-Qasmi asked the
claimant to complete a spreadsheet to provide more information about the matters in
his grievance. He did so on 15 July, sending the spreadsheet and supporting
documents.
416. The grievance meeting on 19 July 2021 was chaired by Mrs Deakin with Mr Al-
Qasmi providing HR support. The claimant was accompanied by Mr Collin, Head of
Marketing. Mrs Deakin had a pack of relevant documents for the meeting which
included the 2020 Dialogue Decision and the salary decision letter from 28 June 2021.
417. The start of the meeting was delayed because the claimant had not asked his
companion to attend. By way of small talk during that delay, Mr Al-Qasmi asked the
claimant whether he had had the Covid vaccine. We accept Mr Al-Qasmi’s evidence
that he felt his exchange was a standard exchange that people up and down the
country were having at the time. The claimant took offence at the question and said
that it was inappropriate to ask him that. He did so in direct terms which made Mr Al-
Qasmi uncomfortable. Mr Al-Qasmi apologised to him. Afterwards, Mr Al-Qasmi
prepared a note of this conversation (p.593) because he was fearful that the claimant
might try to use the conversation against him. He accepted that on reflection he should
not have asked the claimant the question.
418. Ms Johnson of the respondent’s HR Team attended as note taker. Her notes of
the meeting were in the Bundle (pp.590-592). Their accuracy was not disputed.
419. We find that at the meeting:
• Mrs Deakin asked the claimant for details of the IT staff who had been given
pay rises on a change of role. He said he couldn't tell her who those people
were because it was their personal data. However, he believed that Mrs Deakin
would have access to the details.
76

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• The claimant made the point that his salary was not paid by the UK (being
recharged to OneIT). (We found that the position was that the majority, but not
all, claimant’s full salary and benefits was recoverable from the Group).
• The claimant said he taken his new role on the understanding there would be a
salary increase.
• The claimant asserted that he was entitled to the Mercer data because it was
personal data. He could ask for it by way of a DSAR. He produced examples
given by the Information Commissioner's Office (“the ICO”) on its website to
support that.
• The claimant repeated his firmly-held conviction that Mr Cornwell’s decisions in
relation to him were influenced by discrimination. He said Mr Cornwell was
unwilling to let go of past events. He referred to Mr Cornwell’s actions as
retaliation.
• The claimant said the 2020 Development Dialogue was discriminatory because
Mr Cornwell had not scored “adaptively”. He explained what he meant by that.
He referred to his exchange of views with Mr Cornwell about that which he
characterised as “civil”. He had been happy to let matters lie on the basis that
the outcome would not impact on future salary or progression. However, he
said, Mr Cornwell was not willing to “let go” of past disagreements. He
contrasted that with Mr Bose’s approach. He said that Mr Bose had listened to
the claimant’s challenges to his performance scores and they had agreed on
the final appraisal.
• When it came to the allegation that Mr Bose had told the claimant that he had
observed discrimination towards him, the claimant confirmed that Mr Bose did
not share any examples of when that discrimination had taken place or what
had taken place. He said Mr Bose had made the comment during their final 1:1
meeting on 15 March 2021.
• The claimant suggested to Mrs Deakin that it was challenging for her to navigate
through the process. He told her he was aware that she and Mr Cornwell had a
long working relationship and said he needed to have faith in the impartiality of
the process.
420. After the meeting Mrs Deakin asked Mr Al-Qasmi to gather information about
the claimant’s past pay rises and about those members of the IT team who had been
given pay rises on a change of role. We have set out our findings in relation to those
“comparators” (Mr Pope and Mr Young) above.
421. Mrs Deakin also proposed to contact Mr Bose and Mr Fattah who had both by
then left the Group. She particularly wanted to contact Mr Bose so that she could
investigate the allegation about his comment at the 1:1 on 15 March 2021. The
claimant strongly objected. He asserted that any such approach would be a breach of
his personal data and that he would report it to the ICO. During further exchanges the
claimant laid out stringent conditions as the only basis on which he would accept Mr
Bose being contacted. He said that they were necessary to protect his personal data.
Mrs Deakin was frustrated by what she saw as the claimant hampering her ability to
77

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
investigate a serious allegation about discrimination which the claimant had himself
raised. The claimant responded to say that the allegation was a background matter on
which he did not require a finding as part of the grievance outcome. He said that any
attempt to reach out to Mr Bose without his consent would be considered a data breach
and would invalidate the grievance. The Group Data Protection officer advised that
under German data protection law, the Group would not provide Mrs Deakin with the
contact details for Mr Bose and Mr Fattah.
422. Mrs Deakin interviewed Mr Cornwell by Teams on 20 July 2021 (pp.596-598).
In summary:
• He explained the decision not to increase the claimant’s salary on review,
adding detail not included in the decision letter. He accepted the claimant
currently earned £884 less than the median point in the Mercer data. However,
that median figure was for the UK as a whole not for the NorthWest. Mr
Cornwell’s view was that when higher wages in London and the South-East
were factored out, the gap between the claimant’s pay and the median would
reduce significantly. He pointed out that the decision was made in the context
of Ms Fuenfstueck’s direction to control personnel costs in 2021.
• He accepted that he had said something to the claimant in the meeting with Mr
Fattah like “we've not always seen eye to eye”. That had been in the context of
praising the claimant’s work and contribution. Although he accepted, on
reflection, perhaps he shouldn't have said it, there was no harm intended and
he felt the claimant had cherry-picked it for the grievance, taking it out of
context. He said the claimant had not challenged him or raised any concerns
about the comment at the time.
• He confirmed he and the claimant had had some battles on work topics in the
past but felt that they were able to understand each other’s positions. He
confirmed he had discussed some development areas with the claimant. He
had reviewed to the 2020 Development Dialogue and thought it was quite
balanced. If anything, he felt he had positively discriminated in favour of the
claimant by scoring him higher in some areas to support him.
• While he respected the claimant’s disability, sometimes communication wasn't
always as it should be. He referred to the concerns raised by colleagues about
communication of deadlines on IT projects or tasks. As an organisation they
needed to find a way around that. They could not damage the business because
of poor communication and the IT department was damaged by poor
communication.
• Mr Cornwell said he respected the fact that communication was probably not
the claimant’s strong point and that may be hampered by his Autism. He had
worked with the claimant on how he could improve communication and tried as
a manager to support the claimant to the best of his ability. Mr Cornwell
accepted that at times he did get “tripped up”.
• He said the claimant constantly demanded better bonuses, constantly
demanded better pay rises and Mr Cornwell needed to be mindful of everyone
else in the organisation. He firmly believed that over the years they had
78

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
probably been “almost a little bit too soft” with the claimant due to some of his
limitations and had positively discriminated in the claimant's favour. He
accepted that he had found the claimant’s constant challenge difficult at times
but tried to deal with that challenge positively and appropriately, the approach
to the pay review being an example of that.
423. Mrs Deakin did not uphold the grievance. She set out her reasons in her
outcome letter dated 29 July 2021 (pp.617-624). She said in her investigation she had
found no evidence or discrimination or victimisation towards the claimant. She also
considered that the claimant’s pay was fair and in line with the market. In summary,
her reasons were as follows:
• Mr Cornwell’s decision on the pay review was reasonable and there was no
bias on his part. He had considered various factors including what Mr Bose had
proposed, what the Mercer benchmarking data indicated and the performance
of the business. She set out the additional detail about his decision which Mr
Cornwell had provided in his interview. She noted that during the period since
Mr Cornwell had been managing director the claimant’s salary increases
amounted to 18% compared to an average salary increase for the respondent
of 8.3%.
• The decision to award a pay rise to other IT staff on transition to OneIT was
decision of the Group not the respondent. She concluded that the comparators
referred to were not in the same position as the claimant.
• The respondent’s position remained that the Mercer data was not personal
data. It had been used as a benchmark for guidance purposes only and there
was no need to scrutinise the data any further.
• Mr Cornwell accepted making the comment in the meeting with Mr Fattah. On
reflection Mr Cornwell accepted he should not have said made it but the
comment had been taken out of context. In context (Mr Cornwell praising the
claimant’s work and contribution) it was appropriate.
• In relation to the 2020 Development Dialogue, she reported Mr Cornwell's
comments from his interview. She acknowledged the need for an employer to
make reasonable adjustments when someone has a disability. That did not
mean overlooking matters when an employee was not able to perform the task
at hand to the required standard. It was a manager’s role to give feedback and
an employee should listen, reflect and take on board feedback. She did not
uphold the allegation that Mr Cornwell had treated the claimant in an
unreasonable or unfair way or had victimised the claimant.
• She had not been able to investigate Mr Bose’s alleged comment despite it
being in her view, a very serious allegation. She had wanted to investigate
further but could not. That was because the claimant would not agree to her
doing so without imposing onerous and unreasonable conditions. It was also
because Group Data Protection could not share Mr Bose and Mr Fattah’s
contact details with her for data protection reasons.
79

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
424. Mrs Deakin confirmed that the claimant had a right of appeal within 5 days of
receiving her letter. Any appeal should be sent in writing to Mr AI-Qasmi, explaining
the grounds for it. He would then assign an appropriate Appeal Officer.
Events from 29 July 2021 to 2 September 2021 – the Grievance Appeal and the
claimant’s cancer diagnosis
The 2021 Grievance appeal
425. On 29h July 2021 the claimant emailed Mr. Al-Qasmi to indicate his intention to
appeal. He said that before appealing he needed to know who would conduct the
appeal and the timescale for it. He sought reassurance that it would be dealt with by a
senior impartial third party not under the management or influence of the UK directors.
He asked Mr Al-Qasmi to be as discrete as possible. He told him there was no need
to name the claimant until the proposed appeal officer had confirmed their willingness
and availability to conduct an appeal and the claimant had confirmed that the
“candidate” to hear the appeal would be someone he would be happy to take his
appeal to.
426. On the same day the claimant made a DSAR for the Mercer data and any
communications between Mr Cornwell, Mr Coupe, Mrs Deakin and Mr Al-Qasmi about
his salary review since 25 February 2021. The respondent responded on 27 August
2021. It did not include the Mercer data. It explained that was in accordance with
guidance both from the Group Data Protection team and the ICO that it was not
deemed personal data. The claimant challenged that, asking for evidence of
correspondence with the ICO. On 3 September 2021 the respondent confirmed they
had evidence in the form of a live chat with the ICO (p.682).
427. Mr. Al-Qasmi emailed the claimant on the 2 August 2021 proposing that the
Group’s HR director for Russia deal with his appeal. The claimant asked whether there
was somebody who could conduct it who was employed in a company under EU
jurisdiction. He explained he was familiar with GDPR and more confident in the
protection of such legislation. As a result. the respondent agreed to change the appeal
officer and Mr Marquard was appointed to chair the appeal.
The claimant’s cancer diagnosis
428. On the 3rd of August 2021 the claimant was diagnosed as having mouth cancer.
He emailed Mr Al-Qasmi. He copied the email to Mr Cornwell and Saikat Sen (“Mr
Sen”) his OneIT matrix manager to confirm that the long term prognosis was good but
that treatment involved major surgery. He explained the current recommendation was
to operate in about 6 weeks’ time. There would be a recovery period of 3-6 months
with some initial weeks recovering in hospital. He asked for confirmation about his sick
pay position. He also asked for discretion about his diagnosis where possible until he
had worked out with whom and how he would like to share it (pp.639-640).
429. Mr Al-Qasmi emailed back to say how sorry he was and that he would do
everything he could to support the claimant. He confirmed he would check with Mr
Coupe in relation to company sick pay but that the claimant’s contract entitled him to
26 weeks full pay in any 12 months. He told the claimant that if he needed time off to
process the news then he should please take it. Whenever the claimant was ready
80

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
and wanted to speak he should contact Mr Al-Qasmi. Mr Cornwell was on leave but
emailed later that day in similar terms as did Mr Sen.
430. A couple of days later Mr Coupe spoke to the claimant to confirm the position
on sick pay and under the respondent’s private heath insurance. He also confirmed
that he had spoken to Mr Sen and they were working on the assumption that the
claimant would be out of the workplace for 6 months while he recovered. He had
explained that Mr Sen would be speaking to the IT team about the claimant’s illness
and how to cover his absence.
431. The claimant was signed off work for 6 weeks from 16 August 2021 while he
was awaiting surgery.
The Grievance appeal process
432. Mr Al-Qasmi was conscious that the claimant’s grievance appeal was still “live”.
On 10 August 2021 he wrote to the claimant about it. He apologised for doing so in
such difficult circumstances. He confirmed that Mr Marquard had agreed to chair the
appeal and was available to do so on 18 or 31 August. Assuming the claimant still
wanted to appeal he asked him to let him know his preference. He said he appreciated
that under the current circumstances the claimant might need more time to decide
what he wanted to do and confirmed that was OK.
433. The claimant responded on 16 August to confirm he would take the offer of an
appeal hearing on 31 August. He made it clear that he felt obliged to do so because
of internal and external timelines. He had been in discussion with ACAS about the
matter and we find the “external” timeline was the time limit for initiating Tribunal
proceedings. He made it clear that in his current circumstances he would prefer
conciliation on the respondent’s part rather than being forced to proceed with his
appeal. In the absence of such flexibility he felt compelled to appeal. That was, he
said, because as an autistic person he must see things done correctly. It was also to
deal with what he referred to as the “entrenched matters” that he felt would affect his
long-term employment and career on his return to work.
434. In light of the claimant’s circumstances, Mr Al-Qasmi suggested to Mr Cornwell
that they modify the respondent’s grievance appeal process. He proposed that could
either be by the appeal being dealt with in writing rather than at a meeting or by
deferring the appeal until the claimant returned from sickness absence. Mr Cornwell
agreed. He noted that the claimant’s email of 16 August appeared to suggest that it
would help to alleviate the stress he was under if the respondent were to reverse the
grievance outcome. While expressing sympathy for the claimant’s situation, Mr
Cornwell said the claimant’s illness could not be grounds to reverse what he regarded
as the correctly made decision.
435. Mr Al-Qasmi was on leave so on 18 August 2021 Ms Johnson of the
respondent’s HR team emailed the claimant on his behalf setting out the proposals for
a modified appeal process.
436. The claimant responded that day. He made it clear that the offer of not having
a face to face appeal meeting did nothing to alleviate the stress of carrying forward his
grievance. If an appeal was the only route, he preferred to go ahead with a face to
face meeting on the 31 August. We find he was concerned that any delay would affect
81

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
his ability to comply with ACAS Early Conciliation and Tribunal time limits. He went on
to say that not offering “early conciliation” at this stage would be interpreted as the
respondent having little regard for his circumstances and compromising his health. He
said “speaking frankly” it was shameful and hurtful that he had to raise the grievance
at all and had been subjected to what he referred to as a “whitewash of a grievance
outcome” by Mrs Deakin who was a personal longstanding friend of Mr Cornwell. He
said that was hurtful given his long years of service to the respondent and the Group.
He said that he was utterly confused why matters had come to this. He said
victimisation “was the only logical explanation”.
437. Ms Johnson replied on 19 August reiterating the offer to modify the appeal
process. The claimant responded the same day making it clear that the only way to
reduce the stress of the process on him was for the respondent to make a “reasonable
early offer of internal conciliation”. Failing that, his final decision was to attend the
grievance appeal hearing on 31 August 2021. He would then “under the advice of
ACAS” see the appeal process to completion “within timescales conducive to
externally moderated conciliation routes, should they become necessary”. He said that
was his final decision and he would provide his written grounds for appeal by 25
August.
438. As agreed, the claimant provided his Grounds of Appeal by 25 August. It was a
comprehensive 10 page document. In summary the grounds were:
• The grievance investigation was biased due to Mrs Deakin's long standing
professional and personal relationship with Mr Cornwell. She had a conflict of
interest which led to her accepting everything Mr Cornwell said unquestioningly.
• The Mercer data should be disclosed. It was personal data under GDPR and
the ICO definition because of the purpose for which it was processed.
• The comparison with the average salary progression of other UK employees
(18% versus 8.3%) wasn’t valid. It was skewed by the claimant’s long service
and did not recognise the claimant’s unique position in a Global role.
• The decision to give pay rises to other IT staff had been made by the
respondent in the UK not the Group.
• There was no consideration of the specific intent of Mr Bose’s email of 25
February 2021 which referred to the new aspects and seniority of the claimant’s
new role and said that a pay review should be “conducted and actioned”.
• The outcome ignored the fact that the claimant had accepted his new role with
increased remit on the basis of there being an increased salary.
• There was no consideration of the unique salary recharge for the claimant’s
salary from the respondent to OnelT.
• There was evidence of a predisposed mindset in relation to the salary review
on the part of Mr Cornwell. That evidence was not considered or followed up in
the investigation in terms of its potential impact on his decision making.
82

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• There was evidence of a mindset on Mr Cornwell’s part inclined towards
victimisation and towards correcting so called “positive discrimination” or “too
soft” treatment of the claimant by Mr Cornwell in the past. That evidence was
not considered or followed up in the investigation in terms of its potential impact
on his decision making.
439. In addition to the allegations against Mr Cornwell, the claimant’s Grounds were
highly critical of Mr Al-Qasmi and Mrs Deakin. He accused the former of acting in an
ill-judged and ill-advised way in deciding to appoint Mrs Deakin to hear the grievance.
He characterised it as a serious matter and a failing of UK HR process. which had
caused an unnecessary delay and stress and, in his view, invalidated the whole
outcome. The claimant cast doubt on Mrs Deakin’s integrity by asserting that she had
“made her personal and professional allegiance with Mr Cornwell the primary
motivating factor in her outcome”. He also alleged she had put pressure on him to
share his personal data with Mr Bose and Mr Fattah. He criticised her for not
understanding what personal data was and for failing to accept that the Mercer data
was personal data.
440. The claimant also alleged that Mrs Deakin had sought to “intimidate him” by
making a false allegation that he had shared details of Mr Bose and Mr Fattah without
their consent. We find that was a reference to Mrs Deakin having said in an e-mail on
21 of July 2021 when discussing approaching them as part of the investigation that
she was “mindful of the fact that the claimant had shared their details apparently
without their consent”.
441. The hearing on 31 August had to be postponed due to Mr Marquard’s travel
arrangements being changed unexpectedly. Mr Al-Qasmi emailed the claimant late in
the evening of 29 August to propose meeting on 3 September instead. Because he
was off work the claimant did not pick up that email until the day the hearing was due
to take place. He explained that he was not able to meet on 3 September because of
his cancer and schedule of treatment (the claimant’s first surgery was on 1 September
2021). His mouth cancer was a progressive condition and his speech was and would
be affected. As a result, the 31 August had been the last opportunity to have his appeal
heard but that, he said, now “been cancelled”. He confirmed that the grounds of appeal
were fully documented and could represent his appeal in writing. There was no need
to meet if the document was considered fully. He repeated that there was still the
opportunity for the respondent to offer a “flexible written position of conciliation”. He
concluded by saying that in light of the circumstances, he could not risk a claim of
victimisation timing out because of delay so he must now “act accordingly.”
442. On 31 August Mr Al-Qasmi confirmed by email that the appeal would be dealt
with in writing rather than face to face. He explained it would be a re-hearing rather
than review, with Mr Marquard considering all the evidence afresh and reaching his
own decision. He asked the claimant whether he had an indication of the pay increase
which he believed he should have been awarded by Mr Cornwell.
443. The claimant confirmed that the best method of communication was by e-mail
and that he was due to have surgery in the next few days. Because speaking was
increasingly painful for him, he confirmed that his wife was authorised to speak on his
behalf if he was unable to and was present. He confirmed that he would write
separately regarding Mr Al-Qasmi's query about the desired outcome.
83

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
444. On 31 August 2021 the claimant initiated ACAS Early Conciliation.
The 3 September 2021 email to Ms Fuenfstueck and the immediate response to it
445. At 23:24 on the night of Friday 3 September 2021 the claimant sent an e-mail
to Ms Fuenfstueck (pp.697-698). He did not copy it to anybody else. He attached his
grievance, the outcome, his appeal and other documents. The email was headed “De-
escalation of a matter and unfortunate events”.
446. The claimant began his email by saying that he had “carefully considered this
before reaching out [to Ms Fuenfstueck]”. He told Ms Fuenfstueck about his life-
threatening cancer diagnosis and the background to his grievance. He said that in
summary his claim was that Mr Cornwell blocked a salary rise for his new role because
of “bias and victimisation and he cannot let go of previous events”.
447. He explained he was writing to Ms Fuenfstueck because she might be able to
“deescalate this before all internal avenues are exhausted” and he would really
appreciate that for the sake of his health and recovery and the overall financial,
ethical, and reputational position of the Group.
448. We quote the rest of the email in full because of its importance to the case:
“The root of this problem once more are the interactions from Richard Cornwell
with regards to me and their effect even though we should in theory rarely interact
under the matrix model. I have never since 1998 experienced such health detriment
under any other manager while working with HARTMANN and Richards position
is forcing his UK colleagues into a defence. I have never raised a formal grievance
before Richard's arrival at the company. I have had positive experiences since with
Matrix managers. He has a problem with me.
The appeal is to be handled by Jens Marquard based on my appeal document as I
cannot now attend a hearing due to upcoming surgery as it was delayed by Jen's
travel plans. I fear it will be once again a hard-line position without balanced
consideration.
This is not a matter I can just drop and there is a 3-month limit in UK law to bring
a claim if this ends up external so it cannot be postponed.
UK HR under Abid AI-Qasmi does not seem to be capable of preventing escalation
or negotiating a path of compromise. I fear more wasted time, resources, expense
(from UK budget), and damage to health and reputation because of fear of listening
to an employee and insisting on the same conclusions right through the internal
process rather than looking for the solution.
Please help if you can. I wish I did not have to write about this right now and it
would have been sorted weeks ago as I have requested, but I must try every internal
channel in the hope I can just concentrate on recovery.”
449. We accept the claimant’s evidence that he was under extreme stress at the
time he wrote the e-mail and that he was desperate to resolve matters so he could
focus on his health. However, we also note that he had “carefully considered” before
writing the email. It was not an email sent without thought. We find that the email was
84

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
not a wholly accurate record of events. For example, the claimant made no mention of
falling out with Mr Coupe or the fact that Mr Cornwell was his line manager because
the claimant had refused to be manged by Mr Coupe.
450. Ms Fuenfstueck responded on the 10th of September to acknowledge the e-
mail. She confirmed she had read it and the attachments and that she would discuss
next steps with Mr Marquard. She forwarded the claimant’s email to Mr Marquard and
to Till Hoffmann (the Group’s Senior VP of IT). Her view (in German so we are reliant
on the translation at p.700) was that the UK team had acted professionally and in
accordance with employment law. She said the claimant’s “personal
conditions….motivate them to support them” which she understood had been done
again and again. She wondered whether the claimant should be involved more in
global issues and less in the UK projects.
451. Mr Marquard forwarded the claimant’s email to Mr Cornwell on the 10
September (p.703). The covering email simply said “fyi”. We find that as far as the
Group management was concerned, the claimant was an UK employee from a
Legal/HR perspective, so it was for the UK management to deal with him.
452. Having considered the claimant’s email overnight, Mr Cornwell felt compelled
to write to Mr Al-Qasmi. In his email on 11 September he said that:
“In short, I do feel [the claimant’s] actions are unreasonable. We are undergoing
a process whereby [the claimant] has raised a grievance (which is absolutely his
right), it has been heard and he has appealed its findings. The appeal process is
underway and he must give it time to run its course. By emailing the CEO of our
organisation bypassing both my boss (the appeal officer) and my boss' boss he
has blatantly undermined you and I and indeed Jens [Marquard], quite clearly
bringing into disrepute my abilities as a leader and if I may say your abilities as
a HR head (you know I have never doubted your obvious significant capabilities
in this area). I guess his actions ahead of an appeal outcome also show a blatant
disregard for Jens to arrive at an informed, fair and professional conclusion
despite his many years of leadership experience.”
453. Mr Cornwell noted the claimant had raised a grievance against him, previously
against Mr Coupe and had expressed displeasure at Mrs Deakin. They constituted the
statutory board of the respondent and if the claimant had such disregard for each of
them it felt to him that the relationship had broken down. He “really [didn’t] know where
we can go with this”. He acknowledged they just needed the grievance process to take
its course, but he wanted his displeasure at the claimant’s unreasonable actions noted.
454. Mr Al-Qasmi responded on 14 September 2021. He agreed with the contents
of Mr Cornwell’s email. He said the claimant should have allowed the appeal process
to conclude before escalating further. He told Mr Cornwell that Mrs Deakin was really
upset because she felt the claimant was questioning her professionalism and that she
was considering taking a grievance against the claimant. We find that accurately
reflected how Mrs Deakin felt at the time.
455. We accept Mr Al-Qasmi’s evidence that he was also upset by the claimant’s
email to Ms Fuenfstueck. He viewed it as an allegation of incompetence against him
made in an email to the Group CEO. He found that humiliating. In his response to Mr
Cornwell, he said that he "fear[ed] the working relationship [with the claimant] was
85

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
breaking down beyond repair". We find that view was shared by Mr Cornwell. It was
agreed that Mr Al-Qasmi would seek legal advice on the best course of action (p.704).
The Grievance Appeal and its outcome
456. In the meantime, having reviewed the grievance appeal documents, Mr
Marquard emailed each of Mr Cornwell, Mrs Deakin, Mr Coupe, Mr Al-Qasmi and Mr
d’Huc asking them questions arising from the claimant’ grounds of appeal. Mr Al-
Qasmi was copied into all the emails. Mr Marquard’s email to Mr d’Huc was to check
whether there were any Standard Operating Procedures (“SOPs”) in place to explain
the relevant roles between UK line manager and matrix line manager, when it came to
salary reviews. He asked who was responsible for actioning any salary increases
specifically in OnelT?
457. Mr Marquard sent his emails on 6 September 2021. He asked for a response
in writing or, if they preferred, via a Teams meeting to be arranged the following week.
All the recipients responded by separate emails on the 7 September. That was after
the claimant had sent his e-mail to Ms Fuenfstueck but, we find, before anyone other
than Ms Fuenfstueck was aware of it or its contents.
458. We accept Mr Marquard’s evidence that in reaching his decision on the
grievance appeal, Mr Marquard took into account those emails responses alongside
the Mercer data and the claimant’s grievance documentation and grievance appeal.
He also had the grievance meeting notes and the notes of Mrs Deakin’s interview with
Mr Cornwell.
459. Mr Marquard dismissed the grievance appeal. He explained his findings and
conclusions in his outcome letter dated 17 September 2021 (pp.715-724). In summary,
he concluded that:
• It was appropriate for Mr Al-Qasmi to appoint Mrs Deakin to hear the grievance.
Of the respondent’s 3 statutory directors, the claimant had previously had a
grievance against Mr Coupe and the current grievance was against Mr
Cornwell. Mrs Deakin was the remaining statutory director and was the
appropriate person to hear the grievance. The claimant had raised no objection
to her hearing it.
• Mrs Deakin was not biased. Although she had known Mr Cornwell
professionally for around 15 years, they did not have a personal relationship.
There was no evidence she had dealt with the grievance in a biased or unfair
way.
• Mr Cornwell had made enquiries to check what Mr Bose had recommended.
The evidence showed that Mr Bose had recommended a pay review rather than
a pay rise.
• Mr Cornwell had carried out the pay review in a fair and reasonable way. He
had consulted the claimant’s matrix manager, One IT, HR and obtained
benchmarking data. Comparison with UK employment averages was valid
given that the claimant was employed in and based in the UK. There was no
evidence to suggest that Mr Cornwell was biased.
86

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• Most of the claimant’s salary was paid centrally by OneIT. However, the
respondent was charged back for work done by the claimant for the respondent
on UK IT matters. In 2020 that chargeback was £13,750. In addition, the amount
paid by OneIT was set during the budget process. It was not adjusted at end of
year to take into account the difference between actual and budgeted costs.
That meant any mid-year pay rise would not be covered by OneIT but would be
padi by the respondent.
• There was no evidence that Mr Cornwell had a negative predisposition towards
the claimant or that he had victimised the claimant. On the contrary, there was
evidence of the respondent and Mr Cornwell having made adjustments to
support the claimant. He referred specifically to those matters set out in Mr
Cornwell’s email of 30 April 2020. Mr Marquard accepted Mr Cornwell's
evidence that the claimant should have had lower scores in some areas within
his 2020 Development Dialogue but the scores were adjusted upward in order
to support the claimant. Mr Marquard noted that the claimant did not dispute
those adjustments had been made at the time - the only concern the claimant
voiced was that the scores did not hamper his future development or negatively
affect decision making.
• The refusal to share the Mercer data had not in any way affected the fairness
of the pay review process. It was the Group’s decision not to share, not Mr
Cornwell’s alone.
• Having reviewed the data himself, Mr Marquard was satisfied that Mr Cornwell's
interpretation of the data was reasonable. The claimant was paid very much in
line with the median. There was a small gap between the median for the UK in
the Mercer data and the claimant’s current compensation package but it
seemed reasonable to Mr Marquard for that small gap to be considered at the
claimant’s next annual salary review.
• There was no evidence to support a finding that Mrs Deakin had intimidated the
claimant or applied pressure to him. She acted on the advice of external lawyers
in seeking to obtain the claimant’s consent to contact Mr Bose and Mr Fattah
because they were relevant to the investigation. Her conclusion that the
claimant had involved Mr Bose and Mr Fattah in his grievance without their
consent was not an unreasonable conclusion to draw.
460. ACAS issued an Early Conciliation Certificate on 6 September 2021. On 22
September 2021 the claimant issued the first of the 2 Tribunal claims in this case
(2411199/2021). It alleged that the refusal of a pay rise was an act of disability
discrimination and victimisation by the respondent.
The email exchanges on 24-30 September 2021
461. On the 24 September 2021 the claimant was signed off work for a further six
weeks due to allow him to recover from head and neck surgery. The same day he
emailed an update to colleagues in the IT team confirming that he was making steady
recovery from his surgery and expected to be back working in November. He also
emailed Mr Cornwell and Mr Sen to say he would like to return to work on 8 November
2021.
87

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
462. Mr Cornwell responded the same day to thank the claimant for his note and
express relief that the outcome thus far sounded promising. He said “please let us
know how we can support you over the coming weeks-[Mr Al-Qasmi] will reach out
separately in terms of next steps of your returning to work and your welfare etc”
(p.726).
463. The claimant responded that evening. He said:
“As you ask and reading your wording 'thus far' and 'next steps' for 'my welfare',
I will say how you can help.
As I have been doing, I will provide clear feedback on my health and position.
There is no need to think for me or consider what might be best for 'my welfare',
I will be explicit.
Therefore, if you read my last mail to Saikat and that I am already feeling the
desire to work, I intend to return on the 8th of Nov to my role as before on a full-
time basis.
Cancer as you are aware is covered by the Equality Act 2010. I would not expect
unfair treatment in denying a choice of date of return or reduction in remit
because of my disabilities unless agreed, although I will of course need to be
brought up to date.”
464. We find Mr Cornwell was genuinely gobsmacked by the response. He
forwarded the claimant’s email to Mr Al-Qasmi saying:
“Good lord!!
How the heck has my well meaning email asking if he is ok been turned into
something so apparently forthright at best and downright negative at worst. I
cannot see how my email elicited subsequent guidance on the equality act. My
email made no reference at all as to any unfair treatment, nothing could be further
from my mind.
I won't respond to Chris as it seems my attempts to be kind [and] supportive are
being met with complete aggression.“
465. We accept Mr Cornwell’s characterisation of the exchange in that email. We
find his email to the claimant was supportive. It made no reference to anything which,
viewed objectively, could be seen as suggesting unfair treatment.
466. Mr Cornwell took a few days before replying. He did so on 28 September,
expressing concern that the claimant seemed to have misunderstood his intentions
which were meant to be positive and supportive. He denied that anything in his e-mail
was unfair or discriminatory and said that was never his intention. The respondent was
not seeking to deny the claimant the right to choose a suitable return date but wanted
to ensure that it understood his needs, supporting him back into work and offering any
adaptations that might be required. He offered the claimant a welfare meeting with
himself and Mr Al-Qasmi when he was ready to return so they could understand how
they could best support him. As an alternative, they could offer an OH appointment.
Another alternative was to write, with the claimant’s consent, to his GP or consultant
88

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
to better understand how they could support and adjust to the claimant’s needs should
he feel that was helpful or beneficial (pp.736-737).
467. The claimant responded on 30 September, saying there was no
misunderstanding or accusation and that he was “laying out expectations to avoid any
future misunderstanding”. He suggested setting up a meeting on or soon after 8
November. He suggested Mr Sen be included so that it could then serve both as the
return to work meeting and a discussion of any potential adaptations. He proposed a
follow up meeting be organised 2 weeks afterwards to check all was well. He made it
clear that permission was not and would not be granted to write to his GP. If anything
medical beyond fit notes was required Mr Cornwell should “let me know exactly what
and why and I will consider and if appropriate request myself”. He did not think that an
OH assessment would be required but that could be confirmed when they met. He
closed his e-mail by saying that he did not imagine they would need to have much if
any dialogue until he returned but wished all copied good health (page 736).
November 2021 - Ms Jones’s appointment and the start of the investigation
468. We accept Mr Al-Qasmi’s evidence that based on the legal advice received, he
decided that the appropriate approach was to treat Mr Cornwell’s email of 11
September 2021 as a grievance and investigate whether the working relationship had
broken down. We accept Mr Al-Qasmi’s evidence that mediation was not considered
appropriate at that stage given the degree of upset felt by Mr Cornwell and himself.
We also accept his evidence that he envisaged mediation as one possible outcome of
Ms Jones’s report.
469. Mr Al-Qasmi and Mr Coupe decided that an external third party should be
engaged to carry out the investigation. We accept the situation was unusual, involving
a Managing Director bringing a grievance against one of his line reports. We accept
their rationale was that it was not appropriate for any of the 3 UK Statutory Directors
to carry out the investigation. The claimant had previously raised a grievance against
Mr Coupe, had alleged that Mrs Deakin was not impartial when she considered his
grievance and Mr Cornwell was the person who had raised a grievance against the
claimant. For the same reason, we find Mr Cornwell then played no part in deciding
how matters should be investigated beyond countersigning the contract with Ms Jones
on 5 November 2021.
470. We accept Mr Al-Qasmi’s evidence that Ms Jones was not the only external
third-party considered. She was appointed because they were impressed by her CV.
It demonstrated experience of carrying out investigations and of conflict resolution.
She was preferred to another candidate who lived abroad because it was seen as
important that whoever carried out the investigation would be able to meet with the
claimant. There was no suggestion that Ms Jones had previously worked for or with
the respondent or any of its directors.
471. Mr Al-Qasmi was on leave for 2 weeks in October. He had an initial call with Ms
Jones on 2 November 2021. She emailed setting out her proposed approach and
proposed timeline. She envisaged reviewing the 3 September 2021 email then
interviewing Mr Al-Qasmi, Mr Cornwell, Mr Coupe and Mrs Deakin. If she identified
any other individuals she needed to talk to during the investigation she would confirm
with Mr Al-Qasmi before interviewing them. She would then prepare a report which
she anticipated submitting by Monday 22 November 2021.
89

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
472. On 3 November 2021 Mr Al-Qasmi emailed Ms Jones to confirm that they had
the “green light” to work with her (p.742). The next step was for her to sign a non-
disclosure agreement to ensure protection of the claimant’s personal data. Mr Al-
Qasmi explained that Ms Miller of Analysis Legal was looking at the GDPR aspects of
sharing employee data with her. He said that the UK IT employee (unnamed at this
point) “likes to mention/ complain to the ICO”. He suggested setting up an initial
briefing call on 5 November with Ms Miller. The intention was that Ms Jones would
then interview each of the UK SMT members on 9 November. Mr Al-Qasmi suggested
1 hour with Mr Cornwell and 30 minutes with each of Mr Coupe, himself and Mrs
Deakin.
473. On 5 November, after the briefing meeting, Mr Al-Qasmi emailed Ms Jones
formally confirming the instructions to proceed with “an investigation into the alleged
breakdown of working relationship between a UK IT employee and the UK SMT.” He
said the investigation “had been triggered by the 3 September 2021 email [to Ms
Fuenfstueck]”. He explained that the employee would be informed of Ms Jones's role
and the rationale for her investigation at a meeting on 8 November. He suggested that
Ms Jones interview the UK SMT. He confirmed they would like Ms Jones to speak to
the employee concerned as part of the investigation. Mr Al-Qasmi stressed the need
for an impartial report. Because he was a proposed witness in the investigation, he
confirmed that Ms Johnson of the HR team would act as the contact point for Ms Jones.
3-5 November 2021 - the car repair and Tax Code exchanges with Mr Coupe
474. Prior to the claimant’s return to work on 8 November 2021 the claimant had
email exchanges with Mr Coupe about 2 matters. We accept Mr Coupe’s evidence
that he viewed the matters discussed as purely routine matters. The email exchanges
happened despite the claimant being signed off sick. We accept that was because the
claimant had been actively dealing with the matters raised while he was off sick. In
those circumstances, Mr Coupe saw no reason to delay emailing until the claimant
had returned to work. Mr Coupe did not in any of the emails demand a response before
the claimant returned to work.
475. The first exchange (Pages 786 to 790) was about repairing some minor
scratches and dents to the claimant’s company car. The claimant had reported them
and was dealing with the claims before he returned to work. In his email on 3
November 2021 Mr Coupe explained that because of the very high excess on the
respondent’s insurance policy, the respondent had decided to allow such minor
scratches and dents to accumulate rather than repairing each as they arose. He also
clarified that where there was a third-party insurer covering the claim, a like for like
courtesy car was allowed but otherwise it would be whatever car was available. Lastly,
he said the respondent’s fleet risk managers had pointed out the claimant had now
reported 17 incidents of damage and had suggested that some driver training may be
helpful to try to reduce claims going forward. Therefore, Mr Coupe said, when the
claimant was back to work, they would arrange a convenient time for that to be carried
out.
476. The claimant felt compelled to respond to the final point. He said there was no
connection between the recent scratches and his driving ability. He had to park his car
on the road and most of the scratches had accumulated while the car was parked and
wasn't a result of his driving. He also felt that he was being compared to drivers who'd
90

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
only been employed by the respondent for a matter of months and so would not have
accumulated the number of incidents that he had with his long service for the
respondent. The claimant’s view was that he was being singled out and suggested this
could be considered an act of victimisation related to his 2021 grievance and the
Tribunal claim he had issued. He asked for the relevant, validated statistics (p.787).
477. The claimant followed up with another email to Mr Coupe on 4 November. He
said:
“In addition to my comments below, if comparisons are to be made over years of
service with other staff, I have never been disqualified for any period because of
a conviction for reckless driving, I do not teeter on the edge with speed or traffic
offense to losing my license. I have solid history of legal driving over decades,
which earlier in my career involved extensive site visits to customers up and down
the country while other company car owners mostly made trips back and forth to
the office.
The context is the 'barrel is being dragged' once again over my long career to
justify a position because of me exercising my legal employment rights. I am
offended and feel harassed and victimised as this was copied to my line manager
without even discussing with me. I would like a measured, careful, considerate
response from you before the end of the week to bring my stress levels down
before the weekend.“
478. We accept Mr Coupe’s evidence that he saw that as a clear dig at him. We also
find it was. He was the only employee of the respondent’s to have lost his licence in
the past, something of which we find the claimant was aware. We also accept Mr
Coupe’s evidence that he found the claimant’s response defensive, confrontational
and inappropriate and found his approach threatening and very unprofessional. The
claimant in his evidence denied that he was specifically referring to Mr Coupe in his
email. He said he was aware of 2 senior managers in the respondent in the past who
had been within points of losing their licence. He conceded in cross-examination that
his email was an over-reaction. He attributed that to the situation he was in at the time
- under stress recovering from cancer. He said he would not have written that same
email now, i.e. at the date of the Tribunal hearing. On balance we find the claimant
was referring to Mr Coupe-there was no evidence of anyone else having been
disqualified from driving who the claimant could be referring to.
479. The second e-mail exchange was triggered by the claimant being notified by
HMRC that his tax code was incorrect and that he had underpaid tax. He had emailed
Mr Coupe in mid-October 2021 to try and understand why that was the case. Further
investigation by the claimant suggested that the issue came about because his yearly
car benefit and car fuel benefit had been reported at lower than it was. That meant not
enough tax had been deducted through PAYE. It left the claimant with around
additional £800 tax to pay in 2020-2021 and potentially 2021-2022. In an email on 4
November 2021 to Mr Coupe he pointed out that it was the respondent, rather than he
himself, who reported matters to HMRC (the claimant did not complete a tax return).
He said he was:
“..concerned that an error has taken place on the company's part in 2020-2021 and
that if this is the case, has it been made in good faith? and the reason clearly
explained to me? or should I make an written 'Employer Error' enquiry with HMRC.
91

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
I must have reassurance it will not happen again. I am reaching out to you again
in the first instance for a transparent explanation.”
The claimant in cross examination evidence said that the reference to “good faith”
came from HMRC guidance he had read using that term. We accept that evidence.
We accept Mr Coupe’s evidence that he took the reference to “good faith” as a
suggestion that the respondent had in some way purposefully been remiss in its
reporting to the HMRC or of wilfully making errors. We accept his evidence that he
thought the accusation was both unfounded and inappropriate, amounting to an
allegation of fraud. Mr Coupe accepted in his email response to the claimant on 5
November that he had not included the claimant’s private fuel benefit in the P46 form.
We accept his evidence that that was a genuine error on his part. In that email he set
out the steps taken to report the benefits the claimant received from the respondent to
HMRC. He pointed out that the claimant was no worse off due HMRC miscalculating
his benefit in that only the timing of the payment of the tax due had changed. He also
assured the claimant that the respondent would “continue to report all benefit changes
at the times required by the Inland Revenue” (p.791).
8 November 2021 - the claimant’s return to work
480. On 8 November 2021 the claimant returned to work. A return to work meeting
took place at 9 a.m. attended by the claimant, Mr Cornwell, Mr Al-Qasmi and Mr Sen.
The claimant and Mr Sen attended virtually. The claimant confirmed that there were
some residual effects of his treatment such as it being tiring to speak. He confirmed
that he wanted to return to work full time rather than on a phased basis and that no
adjustments were currently needed. He said that if he did need any further support he
would reach out and ask for it. A further meeting with Mr Sen was to be arranged later
in the week to bring the claimant up to date with work issues.
481. At the end of the meeting Mr Al-Qasmi told the claimant that Mr Cornwell felt
that his 3 September email to Ms Fuenfstueck completely undermined him and that
their working relationship had broken down. He explained that the respondent had
decided to appoint an independent external investigator who would contact the
claimant in due course. Depending on the outcome of the investigation the claimant
might be invited to a hearing. We accept Mr Al-Qasmi’s evidence that he felt it was
appropriate to tell the claimant about the investigation because the claimant had
confirmed he was fully fit to return to work. We find that if the claimant had said he
wasn't fully fit, Mr Al-Qasmi would have delayed telling him about the investigation.
482. We find the claimant was shocked. We find he said in response that he believed
the investigation was an illegal act and that he alleged that he was being victimised for
exercising his rights to raise complaints against the respondent. We find he also tried
to explain that he wrote the 3 September email at a time of great strain given the health
issues he was facing. Mr Al-Qasmi confirmed that he would follow up with a letter and
the meeting ended.
483. At 11:52 on the same day the claimant e-mailed Mr Al-Qasmi, copying in Mr
Cornwell, Ms Fuenfstueck and Mr Marquard (p.772-773). He explained the 3
September e-mail was written as a request to see if Ms Fuenfstueck could de-escalate
the matter of the disputed pay review. It was written, he said, in an emotional and life
changing context. He explained that he copied Ms Fuenfstueck into his current email
in a constructive sense and an open way. He said that there continued to be 100%
92

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
commitment on his part to a good working relationship with Mr Cornwell. His Tribunal
claim was a challenge of actions rather than a personal view of Mr Cornwell and his
capacity to modify his approach if needed. He said bringing the claim was consistent
with respect for Mr Cornwell’s position as MD. He confirmed that he was open to
mediation and that the Tribunal claim could be resolved before it was publicly heard.
484. He said that it would be an illegal act for the respondent to unfairly dismiss him
because of “a breakdown in relationship” because he had legitimately exercised
protected rights and used internal procedures. He said his Autism and cancer
diagnosis were protected characteristics. He made clear he would add any such illegal
acts to his ongoing Tribunal claim. He closed by saying:
“Compassion is important, it is fundamental part of functional relationships for a
manager. Respecting another's right to point out when they think something is not
right is also a part. The ability to compartmentalise is also important which I have
and believe needs to be a skill of a business leader. I would ask that Richard and you
do not try to use inappropriate routes here and let us find a way.”
485. Later that afternoon the claimant emailed Mr Al-Qasmi and Mr Cornwell again.
He confirmed that as a demonstration of his willingness to enter conciliatory
discussions he had instructed ACAS to reach out to the respondent in relation to the
Tribunal claim.
486. Later still that afternoon, Mr Al-Qasmi emailed the claimant a letter confirming
that Ms Jones had been appointed to carry out an investigation into the claimant’s
working relationship with the respondent (p.771). It said the reason for that was
because Mr Cornwell felt that by sending the 3 September email while the grievance
appeal process was still ongoing, the claimant had "blatantly undermined” Mr
Cornwell, Mr Al-Qasmi and the grievance process. It said that “due to this and other
matters” Mr Cornwell felt the working relationship between the claimant and him had
broken down. The final paragraph stressed that "this matter is still under investigation
and no decision has yet been taken as to whether this matter will progress to a
hearing". It stressed the matter was confidential and should not be discussed with
anyone within the respondent.
487. On 9 November, the claimant emailed Mr Al-Qasmi to say he was open to
discussion or mediation with him and Mr Cornwell “if the [3 September] email has
caused unintended offense”. He asked if they had considered that option and, if not,
why not. If the respondent insisted on the third-party investigation, he said he had
several important questions and concerns, including questions relating to the Equality
Act 2010, his disabilities and reasonable adaptations. Those questions should be
answered before the investigation began for it to be fair and impartial. He explained
that the timing of the proposed investigation was causing him immense stress in the
context of his cancer diagnosis and treatment, Autism and his return to work after a
long absence. He confirmed he would formalise a reply to Mr. Al-Qasmi's letter in the
next few days.
488. Mr Al-Qasmi responded later that day to confirm he had not wished to cause
the claimant any stress by telling him about the investigation. He confirmed that Ms
Jones had been instructed to start her investigation and that she would be in touch
with the claimant in due course. Mr Al-Qasmi said that on reflection it would be
appropriate for him to step away because Ms Jones might wish to speak to him as part
93

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
of the investigation so he would hand over the claimant's e-mail to Ms Johnson who
would then liaise with the claimant as appropriate.
489. On 10 November 2021 the claimant emailed Mr Cornwell and Mr Sen to say he
was unwell and unable to work. We accept the claimant’s evidence that the news of
the investigation had a considerable impact on him. He saw his GP that day who
provided a fit note confirming he was unfit to work for 4 weeks. The reason given was
“squamous cell carcinoma of tongue”. Neither the fit note nor the claimant’s email
referred to the impact of the investigation as a cause for his absence.
Ms Jones’s investigation
490. On 8 November Ms Johnson sent Ms Jones 3 emails. The first email included
a chronology of events and a background summary. We find both were factually
accurate “high level” summaries of the key events since 2018. The chronology began
with the claimant’s Autism diagnosis in October 2015. It and the background summary
set out the issues the claimant had raised in his 2018 Grievance, 2018 Tribunal claim
and 2021 Grievance and Tribunal claim. In addition, the chronology included the
Aspiedent report, the claimant challenging his 2020 pay review and bonus for 2019
and his emails to Ms Fuenfstueck on 14 April 2019 and 3 September 2021.
491. Ms Johnson attached the 2018 Tribunal claim form, amendment and the
respondent’s Tribunal response form with her first email. The documents attached to
her second email included the Aspiedent report, documents relating to the 2021
Grievance and email exchanges relating to a number of the incidents we have covered
in our findings above, including the 2019 DSAR, the York incident and the claimant’s
challenges relating to bonuses and pay. The third email attached the 2021 Grievance
Appeal Outcome, the claimant’s 2021 Tribunal Claim (2411199/2021) and the
response.
492. Ms Jones interviewed Mr Cornwell on 9 November. She interviewed Mr Al-
Qasmi and Mr Coupe separately on 10 November and Mrs Deakin on 12 November.
She took a structured approach to each interview, which covered 4 core areas and
themes. They were:
• the management and support given to the claimant
• Examples of CT's communication and approach.
• Illustrations of the impact caused by CT's engagement
• Views on the future working relationship
493. Ms Jones produced full (but not verbatim) written notes of each interview
(pp.1008-1035). It was not suggested they were anything other than an accurate
record of those interviews.
Mr Cornwell’s evidence to Ms Jones
494. Mr Cornwell’s view was that the claimant’s email on 3 September 2021 was
unreasonable, totally undermined him and painted his abilities as managing director
and those of Mr Al-Qasmi in a very negative light. Mr Cornwell read the request that
94

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
Ms Fuenfstueck “de-escalate” matters as being the claimant urging her to bow to the
claimant’s request for a significant pay increase, failing which he threatened legal
action. Mr Cornwell said it was the level of disregard shown by the claimant in his email
which had caused Mr Cornwell to send his email of 11 September expressing the view
that the relationship between the claimant and the business had broken down.
495. Mr Cornwell explained the difficult business context resulting from Brexit,
COVID and pressure from the NHS to reduce prices. The respondent’s margins were
below those of the Group and there was significant pressure on it to improve
profitability through increased revenues or by controlling costs. Tough decision had to
be made for the good of the business, e.g. the respondent had had to make
redundancies in 2020. He said that as a reasonable employer he would expect staff
to understand those financial pressures when requesting any extraordinary pay
increase as the claimant had done. Mr Cornwell felt strongly that internal matters
(especially what he regarded as unnecessary ones) which diverted his energies away
from the customer and external matters had the potential to damage the business
further.
496. Ms Jones asked Mr Cornwell for a summary of his working relationship with the
claimant and the chronology of his reporting to him. Mr Cornwell said that from the
outset he had shown the claimant a high level of support and understanding. He had
learned how the claimant like to work and had made adaptations in the way he worked
with him. He confirmed that when the claimant was engaged in his work he was
“delightful and a clear expert in his field” but that he became “aggressive in tone and
approach when presented with feedback or challenge”. Mr Cornwell's firm view was
that the claimant had not suffered any detriment under his leadership. He felt it was
quite the opposite, e.g. his decision to “abolish” the second tier of management and
include the claimant in SMT, reporting directly to him.
497. Mr Cornwell said the claimant’s ambition in wanting to be appointed UK IT
Director was a positive. However, Mr Cornwell had to assess business need in
deciding whether such a role was justifiable. His assessment was that the UK business
did not warrant an IT Director post. That decision had led to the 2018 Grievance which
Mr Cornwell felt had been dealt with fairly. He made it clear the claimant had right to
raise a grievance but Mr Cornwell needed to make the decision for the business.
498. Mr Cornwell said that the decision to change the claimant’s reporting line from
Mr Coupe to himself, had been made as a concession to the claimant’s demands. Mr
Cornwell accepted the claimant had lost trust in Mr Coupe but said he believed Mr
Coupe had not done anything to lose the claimant’s trust. In his view, the claimant’s
dissatisfaction was more to do with Mr Coupe’s having refused the claimant’s demands
for a promotion to IT Director.
499. Mr Cornwell said his management style was different to Mr Coupe’s. He
characterised it as a demanding but fair style whereby he expected people to meet
their commitments and regularly communicate progress (or lack of it) against a project.
He did not believe that as a managing director that style was in any way unusual.
500. Ms Jones asked about the support the respondent had given the claimant. Mr
Cornwell said there had been several adaptations since 2018:
95

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• Formally agreeing that the claimant could work from home subject to his being
in the office 2 days a month (an extension of the previous agreement which
allowed the claimant to work 2 days from home).
• Mr Cornwell holding planned and unplanned 1:1s with the claimant to support
him in areas such as his communication style. He explained that the claimant's
communication style could be perceived by those working with him as brusque
or abrupt. That was especially the case for colleagues to whom the claimant
had not disclosed that he was an autistic person, having made it clear he did
not want his Autism to be disclosed beyond a limited group of managers. Mr
Cornwell said he worked with the claimant to help adapt his e-mail
communication style in particular and offered coaching on how better to deal
with colleagues in Germany.
• Mr Cornwell defusing situations with senior members of the Group’s leadership
team as a result of the claimant’s communication style. Asked for a specific
example Mr Cornell referred to the incident raised with him by the Sales Director
in September 2019 about the claimant being uncooperative and disrespectful
to his peer in front of junior staff (the incident in para 309 above). In hindsight,
Mr Cornwell said he did not think the incident had been appropriately dealt with
because Mr Cornwell had been nervous about giving the claimant feedback.
That was because he was certain that it would result in a claim of victimisation
or discrimination neither of which would have been true. Managing the claimant,
he said, took a significant amount of time and effort
• Wherever practically possible Mr Cornwell and other members of SMT
communicated with the claimant by email. The claimant had informed them that
that was his preferred means of communication because it gave him more time
to provide a considered response.
501. Mr Cornwell said that managing and supporting the claimant took a
considerable amount of time and effort. Asked by Ms Jones about how the claimant
worked and Mr Cornwell’s approach to managing him, Mr Cornwell said that providing
feedback to the claimant was challenging. He said the claimant did not accept
feedback easily and seemed unable to accept company decisions. Mr Cornwell cited
as examples:
• The issue of communication over project progress. Mr Cornwell said he had
attempted to resolve that during the 2018 end of year management meeting
without success. The claimant had asserted that his approach of reporting was
the standard IT approach. Mr Cornwell had invited the global head of IT to
discuss this. That was to support the claimant to understand his workload and
lack of communication regarding project and end points which would become a
significant issue. The global Head of IT had agreed with Mr Cornwell's
interpretation of matters. Mr Cornwell’s said he had adapted his approach
rather than simply giving the feedback and expecting the claimant to accept it
Mr Caldwell had gone to the expense and time of arranging the meeting so that
the claimant could have a clear explanation of why Mr Cornwell's approach was
the appropriate one.
• The claimant’s approach to the transition to OneIT.
96

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• The December 2018 Expenses incident. Mr Cornwell said that was an example
of an extreme reaction a simple challenge could cause.
• The claimant challenging the reduction in his 2018 bonus because his sickness
absence was disability related despite none of his fit notes referring to the
claimant’s disability. Mr Cornwell explained that he had reversed the decision
to make an absence-related reduction because they feared the claimant was
likely to raise a grievance seeking to link his absence to his disability.
• The claimant’s challenge to his 2019 bonus award in early 2020. Mr Cornwell
explained that the claimant had pushed back and said he had taken the matter
to ACAS. Mr Cornwell worked with Mr Bose and decided to increase the bonus
as a means to defuse the situation. That had taken a considerable amount of
his time and defocused him from the core business. Mr Cornwell told Ms Jones
he thought that the original bonus was fair. They had backed down for fear of a
grievance claim and accepted that was not the way to manage staff.
• The Car repair exchange with Mr Coupe in November 2021. Mr Cornwell said
the claimant had reacted to the Insurers’ suggestion that the claimant may
benefit from driver awareness training in a “challenging and disproportionate
way and would not take the feedback or advice on board.”
502. Ms Jones asked for specific examples of when Mr Cornell felt that no matter
what he did to try and support the claimant, it was challenged. Mr Cornwell referred to
the 24 September 2021 e-mail exchange (paras 461-463 above) quoting the
claimant’s email. Asked by Ms Jones how he felt about that e-mail, Mr Cornwell said
that the claimant's response to a simple welfare e-mail was “aggressive in its style”
and that the claimant’s approach made “it impossible to work with him”.
503. Ms Jones asked about steps to better understand the claimant’s disability. Mr
Cornwell explained the attempts to arrange the workplace assessment in 2017 which
had culminated in the Aspiedent report. He said that the claimant had rejected 4
suggested providers because they would not understand his complex neurological
condition. Mr Cornwell said Medigold had been rejected in “quite and aggressive
fashion” because the claimant did not like how they dealt with him and that the
claimant’s complaint direct to its CEO had resulted in a verbal complaint about his
attitude from Medigold to the respondent. He went on to explain that the claimant had
rejected the Aspiedent report after initially seeming positive about his engagement with
Dr Guest, having himself suggested Aspiedent to the respondent. Mr Cornwell said
his view was that that the Aspiedent Report was very balanced, suggesting ways in
which the respondent could adapt to the claimant’s needs but also clear in
recommending ways in which the claimant could change his ways of working in order
to drive a better working relationship.
504. Ms Jones asked where the claimant’s refusal to engage further with any
recommendations or suggestions in the Aspiedent report left the respondent. Mr
Cornwell’s response was that the respondent would take the advice and guidance set
out for them to support and work with the claimant.
505. Ms Jones asked Mr Cornwell about the impact of the 2021 Tribunal claim on
him, noting it was the second pursued by the claimant in 3 years. Mr Cornwell said the
claimant’s immediate response to being denied his requested pay rise was to raise a
97

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
grievance and, when that was not upheld, to immediately submit a Tribunal claim. He
said it become “an impossible position to be in”. Whenever the claimant was given
feedback he did not like, he would “instantly become threatening and aggressive.” The
threats “related to raising a grievance, pursuing a claim in the Tribunal or making a
complaint to the ICO”. As the Managing Director, Mr Cornwell said he was left fearful
in his management of the claimant. his feeling was that if he challenged the claimant,
offered developmental feedback or concern and welfare support it would be quickly
followed by a form of written threat. There were a few occasions where the dialogue
from the claimant was positive or thankful. Because of his fear of the fallout if he gave
the claimant feedback and suggested corrective action, matters which required
correction were often left uncorrected. That led to projects being delayed and
customers being let down. He said it was the first time he'd faced a situation such as
this whereby any attempts to manage an employee resulted in a threat, grievance and
in a Tribunal claim. He also said that not having those conversation with the claimant
created the perception by other employees that he was adopting a more lenient
approach when dealing with the claimant.
506. Asked to reflect on the impact that the claimant’s disability had on the claimant
and on him, Mr Cornwell said he accepted the claimants disability could tend towards
a forthright communication style. The Aspiedent report shared some valuable
information about that, as a result of which Mr Cornwell had adapted his approach.
However, Mr Cornwell did not feel that the claimant’s disability gave him a free reign
to challenge aggressively and constantly in the way that he did. Mr Cornwell referred
to the very high level of stress and negative impact on his own mental health of always
having to think “if I push back or say no to the claimant what level of response will I
get and what subsequent threat will I receive”. That was not an acceptable way to be
a leader and manager.
507. In answer to Ms Jones’s question, Mr Cornwell said that given the escalation of
matters involving other employees such as the regional director, Group HR and even
Ms Fuenfstueck, the respondent conservatively estimated the resource used in
dealing with the claimant's latest grievance as the equivalent of 44 individual days. Mr
Cornwell's view was that the claimant appeared to have no regard for how his actions
impacted individuals and the organisation.
508. Asked about his views about the relationship going forward Mr Cornwell
confirmed he felt he'd reached a point where there was a total inability to manage the
claimant. The claimant’s refusal to accept what he perceived as negative response to
any of his requests (e.g. for a pay rise) had led Mr Cornwell to conclude the relationship
had completely broken down. Furthermore, Mr Cornwell commented that following the
grievances and tribunal claims pursued by the claimant (which he acknowledged was
his right) Mr Cornwell felt the relationship between the senior management of the
respondent including himself and the claimant had deteriorated significantly and that
it was at the point of being irreconcilable.
509. Asked for his final comments and observations Mr Cornwell added that if each
time the claimant disagreed with a decision he felt compelled to complain directly to
the Group CEO then Mr Cornwall's ability to manage him was effectively eliminated.
The 3 September e-mail had evidenced a lack of respect for UK management which
was a strong indication of the relationships having broken down. That, combined with
an easy willingness to complain to the very top of the organisation each time they
98

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
refused to bow to his demands made it difficult to see how they could continue working
with the claimant in a mutually trustful and respectful working relationship.
510. Mr Cornwell accepted it was every employee's right to make a complaint if they
felt something was wrong. It was also their right to seek a pay increase or more role
responsibility. They had a right to have those concerns and request and heard fairly.
However, the way the claimant approached those situations was wrong as he used
threatening behaviour. In Mr Cornwell's view his leadership was being discredited
adding an elevated level of workload and a high degree of stress and to some extent
fear in him. Mr Cornwell strongly refuted the allegations of discrimination and
victimisation. He said that to be consistently accused was highly upsetting and brought
into disrepute his ethics and his abilities as a manager and a leader, abilities he took
pride in and would ordinarily receive high praise for.
511. Finally, Ms Jones asked whether the claimant could report into any other part
of the business. Mr Cornwell’s view was that he could not. The accepted Group
process was that all in-country employees should legally report into that country's
management structure. That made sense from the perspective of those managers
dealing with practice and process, taxation and local employment law. That applied to
all IT members despite the fact that they reported on a matrix basis into OneIT. Mr
Cornwell said it was unreasonable to expect any manager to be subjected to the
behaviour and conduct displayed by the claimant. All three UK statutory directors had
been subject to it either through direct line management (i.e. himself and Mr Coupe)
or as part of a process (Mrs Deakin dealing with the claimant’s grievance). As
managing director Mr Cornell said he could not allow that to continue. There was the
ongoing threat that the claimant would pursue another Tribunal claim at some point in
the future when he disagreed with feedback or management instruction. Unfortunately,
he said “the claimant was perceived as a troublemaker which was a difficult statement
to share on a senior employee in the organisation.”
512. We find that Mr Cornwell’s evidence to Ms Jones accurately reflected his
genuine view of the situation as at November 2021.
Mr Coupe’s evidence to Ms Jones
513. Mr Coupe’s outlined the background to the claimant‘s employment with the
respondent and his Autism diagnosis. He said that his working relationship with the
claimant was fine until the claimant raised his 2018 complaint about not being
appointed as IT director. Mr Coupe said there was a tension point around money
despite the claimant being highly paid. Mr Coupe said that he was “blissfully unaware”
that the claimant had lost all trust and confidence in him, as the claimant had asserted
in his 2018 Grievance. The claimant had never raised any issues with him.
514. Mr Coupe was upset by the claimant’s allegations but was happy with the
decision to move the claimant’s line management to Mr Cornwell. He said managing
the claimant had been challenging. Whenever an opinion was expressed, it would
become an altercation for what should have been run-of-the-mill things. So long as
there was agreement with the claimant there was no problem. Since the change of line
management his contact with the claimant was minimal.
515. Ms Jones asked about examples of the impact of the claimant’s approach.
99

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
516. Mr Coupe gave the November 2021 car repair issue as an example. He said
the claimant’s engagement with the insurers had been confrontational despite their
request being a perfectly reasonable one given the number of claims made by the
claimant. He quoted the claimant’s emails of 3 and 4 November 2021. Mr Coupe
commented that the claimant’s response was defensive, confrontational and
inappropriate. Ms Jones asked him to clarify that and Mr Coupe said he was clear that
the comment about disqualification in the claimant’s email was aimed at him as he was
the only employee to lose his licence in the past. He said it was threatening and
unnecessary and very unprofessional.
517. The second example was the tax code issue. He explained the background and
quoted the claimant’s email of 4 November 2021. Mr Coupe told Ms Jones that to
insinuate that the respondent had purposefully been remiss in its statutory reporting
and wilfully made errors was unfounded and inappropriate. Dealing with matters which
should have been routine took an excessive amount of time. Mr Coupe estimated that
it had taken him to 3-4 hours to deal with the car repair issue.
518. The third example was of the claimant not disclosing the type of cancer he had
been diagnosed with to the respondent. Mr Coupe said he acknowledged the
claimant's right to privacy and confidentiality. However, his unwillingness to positively
engage around the diagnosis made it difficult for Mr Coupe, who needed to share
details of long-term sickness absences with the respondent’s benefits provider. Mr
Coupe said he'd decided not to ask the claimant the specifics of his illness because
he felt it was likely to result in a negative reaction similar to the car repair issue or the
tax code issue. He had tried to satisfy the insurance company’s questions without all
the details.
519. Mr Coupe’s view was that the claimant had been extremely supportive of the
claimant with Mr Cornwell being one of the best managing directors he'd worked under
when it came to supporting staff.
520. When asked whether he had had awareness training in understanding Autism,
Mr Coupe said there had been no specific training but he had had access to the
Aspiedent report which he found insightful. Its recommendations had helped him with
how to communicate. However, he said the report did not provide advice or support in
how to manage disagreeing with the claimant. That was the ultimate challenge. He
explained that he had talked to Mr Cornwell about his responses to the car repair and
tax code emails and had also run his drafts by external solicitors. He said he would
not ordinarily do so but due to “the claimant’s litigious approach” it “had to be done”.
521. Ms Jones asked Mr Coupe what his approach was to dealing with challenging
staff. He said he was seen as approachable and maintained an open door policy. He
would usually assess situations to identify and understand the issues before acting.
He said he had never had to manage such challenges in an employee as he had faced
with the claimant. He said he was sympathetic to the claimant’s diagnosis and did all
he could to support him. However, it was extremely difficult and stressful “never
knowing what would set [the claimant] off”.
522. Ms Jones asked about his view on the working relationship going forward. She
asked when the point was reached when the management of an individual was no
longer proportionate. Mr Coupe's view was that a considerable amount of time and
effort had been applied by the SMT in smoothing the waters and he felt that this was
100

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
unjustifiable and “to some extent ludicrous”. He estimated it took up about 25% of Mr
Al-Qasmi’s time, which was distracting him away from other HR critical activities. He
felt that the claimant that the support and accommodation provided to the claimant had
gone beyond a reasonable point.
523. Mr Coupe’s view that the claimant did not have any respect for the UK
leadership team. His clear view was the relationship had broken down. Although he
was sorry about that, he said that it was not possible to compromise with the claimant
- it was “his way or the highway to a tribunal”. The claimant had fallen out in essence
with all 3 of the statutory directors and there was really nowhere else for him to report
to unless he was moved to a different role level which would not make any business
sense.
524. We find that Mr Coupe’s evidence to Ms Jones accurately reflected his genuine
view of the situation as at November 2021.
Mr Al-Qasmi’s evidence to Ms Jones
525. Mr Al-Qasmi first summarised his role in the respondent and within the Group.
Ms Jones then asked about the impact of the claimant’s approach/communication on
Mr Al-Qasmi’s work. He explained that he had previously been successfully involved
in global HR projects. However, in 2021 he had to step out of a global HR project
halfway. He said that was “solely because of” the demands the claimant was placing
on the UK HR function. He explained that when the claimant did not accept advice or
decisions made by management it resulted in an “immense burden of additional HR
work” which put a high degree of stress on Mr Al-Qasmi and his team (at that time 2
full time equivalent staff including Mr Al-Qasmi). He said that the fear of litigation meant
that there was a disproportionate emphasis on ensuring that any correspondence with
the claimant was correct. That involved regular dialogue with the external solicitor but
also a significant amount of management time providing second opinions on decisions
and on draft emails to the claimant from colleagues. He said no other employee in the
organisation generated such effort and time commitment. He described the claimant’s
emails as “challenging and at times threatening”.
526. Asked to quantify the time HR spent dealing with the claimant, Mr Al-Qasmi
said he estimated that in 2021 the UK HR team had spent around 21.5 days supporting
the claimant’s grievance “for fear of a possible employment tribunal”. Mr Al-Qasmi said
he fully understood and accepted that the claimant was entitled to raise a grievance.
However, the claimant would challenge any outcome which meant that Mr Al-Qasmi
had to move other HR tasks and commitments giving priority to the claimant’s case.
There was a constant fear that the claimant might escalate matters further, with the
claimant’s approach to the respondent being “adversarial”.
527. Asked for specific examples, Mr Al-Qasmi referred to the 2019 DSAR request.
Mr Al-Qasmi said he felt the claimant’s allegations that he was attempting to “victimise,
intimidate resist or harass” him were “strong and unwarranted” given that he was just
doing his job in line with employment law, advice received and procedure. Mr. Al-
Qasmi explained that after that exchange he was no longer comfortable meeting the
claimant on a one to one basis and so had asked Mr Cornwell to join their meeting.
528. Mr Al-Qasmi said he felt that at times the claimant took a disrespectful tone with
him. That was something Mr Cornwell had commented on in relation to the claimant’s
101

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
email about the 2018 Grievance (para 136). Mr Al-Qasmi said this caused him a lot of
anxiety and led him to constantly second guessing himself to try and work out how the
claimant would react to anything he wrote to him. Colleagues had approached him to
make sure he was ok following communications from the claimant.
529. Mr Al-Qasmi said the e-mail of the 3 September affected and hurt him. Ms
Jones asked him to explain why. He said it was wrong for the claimant to write to Ms
Fuenfstueck whatever his rationale was given that the grievance appeal process had
not been completed. Doing so had a significant impact, leading Mr Al-Qasmi to
question himself and making him anxious about what Ms Fuenfstueck and senior
colleagues in the Group HR would think of him.
530. He told Ms Jones that once a management decision had been made which the
claimant disagreed with he would adopt a “threatening tone and show little respect to
senior leaders of the organisation”. He said he also felt that the claimant would seek
to use future line management decisions regarding him as ammunition to use against
Mr Cornwell and the respondent.
531. Ms Jones asked how the respondent had managed the claimant’s disability and
how the outcomes from the OH report process had been actioned. Mr Al-Qasmi
explained how the Aspiedent report had come about, with the claimant rejecting other
suggested providers and sourcing his own. He said that the respondent was open and
prepared to engage further with Aspiedent based on the recommendations for training
but the claimant had refused to engage further with Aspiedent. However, the report
had still been helpful in understanding the claimant’s communication style, social
interaction and in creating a better understanding of neurodiversity. Mr Al-Qasmi had
discussed with the claimant how he could support him. He had adjusted his
communication style with the claimant, using email as the primary means of
communication and trying where possible to give advance notice of agenda items. He
also confirmed that all staff had received equality and diversity training including
unconscious bias training.
532. Ms Jones asked how the claimant was supported following his diagnosis. Mr Al
Qasmi explained about the claimant’s unwillingness to share his diagnosis widely.
That posed some challenges where the claimant’s engagement with colleagues was
challenging but those on the receiving end were unaware of the potential impact of his
Autism on his communication. While acknowledging that the claimant's privacy was
very important, Mr Al-Qasmi said that if he had chosen to be more open and
transparent about his diagnosis that might have aided greater support and
understanding.
533. Ms Jones asked about the approach to managing the claimant’s request to be
appointed as IT director. Mr Al-Qasmi confirmed that was an ongoing issue but that
there was no such role. He discussed the challenges the respondent had faced in
negotiating the claimant’s transition into OneIT in 2019. He said they had eventually
to explain to the claimant that if he did not accept that role then he would potentially
be redundant. Mr Al-Qasmi acknowledged it was fair enough for the claimant to take
time to decide what role would be right for him but his approach in constantly
challenging and delaying matters affected other UK IT colleagues. Mr Al-Qasmi quoted
the claimant’s e-mail of 26 June 2019 where the claimant referred to a “perceived
heavy-handed move to get me away from UK responsibilities” and said that if that
102

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
approach continued it would amount to victimisation or discrimination. Mr Al-Qasmi
said that it had somewhat become the norm for the claimant to adopt a threatening
attitude until he got what he wanted, causing significant and unnecessary stress to
those that had to deal with it.
534. Asked for examples of support or adjustments for the claimant, Mr Al-Qasmi
referred to the regular meetings with Mr Bose following the claimant’s move into OneIT
to make sure that the claimant was appropriately supported. Mr Al-Qasmi explained
those meetings were cancelled at the claimant's request because he felt they were no
longer required and he felt no further adaptations were needed. When it came to
adaptations he had made personally, Mr Al-Qasmi said he did adapt his approach
when dealing with the claimant. He had dealt with many challenging employees during
his career, but the claimant's did not have the ability to understand the impact of his
actions and communication style on others.
535. Ms Jones asked how Mr Al-Qasmi saw the relationship going forward. He said
he felt the working relationship had broken down with the UK leadership team
particularly following the 3 September e-mail. Regardless of the claimant’s role in
OneIT, he was still an UK employee and it was of paramount importance that the
person filling the role of UK IT manager had a good working relationship with the UK
SMT and be able to effectively engage with them. That required mutual respect and
“not working under fear of threats of discrimination, victimisation and potential litigation
resulting in an employment tribunal”. Mr. Al-Qasmi suggested that it seemed the
claimant also felt the relationship had broken down. He said that in the 2021 claim
form (case 2411199/2021) at paragraph 14 the claimant had said that there “was a
lack of trust on his part with regards to Mr Cornwell conducting the pay review fairly or
at all due to his experience with the bonus payment in 2020.”
536. We find that Mr Al-Qasmi’s evidence to Ms Jones accurately reflected his
genuine view of the situation as at November 2021.
Mrs Deakin’s evidence to Ms Jones
537. Mrs Deakin’s evidence was that the claimant did not respond well to feedback
or being challenged. She gave as an example the incident with the external GDPR
consultant (para 302). That was one of her first interactions with the claimant after
joining the business. She was not aware of his Autism diagnosis. Mrs Deakin explained
that she had expressed how uncomfortable she felt that the claimant was working
whilst in a meeting. She felt it was rude and disrespectful. She said that his response
was along the lines of “do you not realise how important I am in the business and that
I have work to do”. She said she had reported the conversation to HR. She also gave
the example of miscommunication over IT project deadlines. When the claimant was
challenged, he got annoyed.
538. Ms Jones asked for examples of how the claimant had responded to Mrs Deakin
and the impact on her. She gave as an example the claimant’s challenge to her
impartiality in dealing with the 2021 Grievance. He had raised no issue in advance but
had commented during the meeting and then raised her previous working relationship
with Mr Cornwell in his grievance appeal. She also referred to the exchanges she had
had with the claimant about contacting Mr Bose and Mr Fattah during the investigation.
She said she felt that the claimant had put every obstacle in her way to prevent her
from investigating that part of his grievance. In her view, it highlighted that the claimant
103

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
took an “unnecessarily defensive and challenging if somewhat threatening approach”
to matters. She suggested a reasoned response would have been to say that the
claimant would check whether it was OK with those individuals for them to be
contacted. Mrs Deakin said the impact of the claimant’s approach was quite profound
and it made her feel very uncomfortable. She said she had momentarily considered
raising a grievance against him but didn't as it would be seen as “tit for tat”.
539. When asked whether the claimant’s conduct had affected her conclusions on
the grievance, Mrs Deakin she said there was a trepidation in the conclusions because
of the claimant’s potential reaction. She said that she had made sure that everything
was looked at and uncovered before reaching the decision. The external solicitor
reviewed the decision letter to make sure it was sufficiently robust which she felt should
be unnecessary for a normal internal HR process.
540. Mrs Deakin confirmed she had not received specific training about Autism but
had undergone the respondent’s equality and diversity and unconscious bias training.
541. Mrs Deakin confirmed she had little involvement with claimant. She had not, for
example, sent an e-mail to the claimant on his return to work because she was scared
of his reaction. Asked about her view of the working relationship going forward, Mrs
Deakin said that she was clear the respondent had been far too tolerant. As an
example, the claimant had not set up an out of office while on his period of sick leave.
That would normally be followed up with the individual but engagement with the
claimant in this case was avoided for fear of how he would react and to avoid “riling
him”. That was not the way to manage employees and the his approach prevented
effective management and leadership.
542. Mrs Deakin felt that the claimant’s working relationship had broken down with
everyone and she couldn't see him reporting to anyone else following the recent
grievance against Mr Cornwell. She confirmed that the that she would not be happy
with the claimant reporting to her, and she felt that it was unlikely the claimant would
want to report to her.
543. Asked for any final comments, Mrs Deakin said that the claimant’s disability
didn't excuse his behaviour and he made it exceptionally hard to communicate with
him. The fact that he did not want colleagues to know about him being an autistic
person did cause issues and prevented open communication with him. She referred
to the significant personal impact and extra work the claimant created. She said that
she was “completely astounded” in how the claimant made something out of nothing.
Despite sharing with the management team that he preferred to communicate by e-
mail and that he reflected before responding this was not the case from what she saw.
She said that what he did and what he said didn't feel as if it added up.
544. Mrs Deakin concluded by saying that the claimant's conduct and approach had
a huge impact on her fellow directors. Mr Coupe was a balanced and caring person
and she saw that the claimant had caused upset and frustration for him which was not
in his nature. Mr Al-Qasmi felt that the claimant’s approach to him was a professional
slur whereas she felt that Mr Al-Qasmi was a total professional. She said that Mr
Cornwell felt helpless and was constantly questioning himself. From a personal
perspective, she said, the business had suffered in that new people in her team had
not had the time commitment from her because she had been so distracted when
dealing with the 2021 grievance and supporting her fellow directors.
104

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
545. We find that Mrs Deakin’s evidence to Ms Jones accurately reflected her
genuine view of the situation as at November 2021.
The continuation of the investigation process and the claimant’s involvement in it
546. Following the interviews Ms Johnson continued to liaise with Ms Jones. She
forwarded relevant emails and documents sent to her by Mr Coupe and Mr Al-Qasmi
after their interviews. They included the emails relating to the car repair, tax and
benefits issues which Mr Coupe had referred to in his interview. Ms Jones had already
been provided with the Aspiedent report. We accept her evidence that she took it into
account in terms of the adjustments that were proposed in it and in considering what
the respondent had done to consider and implement them.
547. On 12 November 2021 Ms Johnson wrote to the claimant. Both Ms Jones and
the respondent’s external solicitor had provided input into the letter. Her letter
acknowledged the claimant’s fit note of 10 November. She explained that Ms Jones
would like to have the claimant’s comments on her investigation report. That was so
that she could consider his feedback when making her findings and recommendations.
Ms Johnson said she appreciated the claimant was signed off work for 4 weeks.
However, she acknowledged it may be a stressful time for the claimant and in order
not to unnecessarily delay the investigation she proposed 2 options which she asked
the claimant to consider. The first was to arrange a remote meeting between the
claimant and Ms Jones on either the 23 or 24 November. It was anticipated the call
would take up to one hour. The second was for Ms Jones to provide the claimant with
some general questions in writing to which he could respond in writing. Ms Johnson
confirmed that prior to either of the options Ms Jones would share her preliminary
report with the claimant. She asked him to confirm his preferred option by Friday 19
November 2021.
548. On 17 November 2021 the claimant responded to say he did not feel well
enough to be able to fully process the investigation, ask questions and represent
himself fairly. He said that the combined effect of Autism and cancer on his
communications “should be assessed if they have unintentionally found fault with
others”. He said that needed to be done on his return to work before any investigation
took place and as a separate exercise relating to reasonable adaptations. He attached
a “to whom it may concern” GP letter which confirmed that the claimant was off work
because of his cancer. He was also “suffering significant stress following his cancer
treatment made worse by his Autistic Spectrum diagnosis” and that had required him
to start on anti-depressants. The GP said that the claimant had informed them that he
was not in a strong enough psychological state to take part in the investigation. The
GP asked the respondent to respect that and hoped the claimant would be stronger in
due course..
549. Ms Johnson responded the following day. Her letter said the respondent was
somewhat confused that the claimant was unfit for work. That was because he had
returned to work on 8 November 2021 and said that he was fully fit to do so. The
respondent’s understanding was that the claimant had fully recovered from his
surgery, She stressed the importance of the claimant taking part in Ms Jones’s
investigation. To facilitate that, she explained the respondent was exercising its right
in the claimant’s employment contract to refer him for an OH examination. The
purpose of the OH appointment was:
105

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
“to confirm the reason for your absence and to ascertain if you will be fit to return
to work when your current Statement of Fitness to Work expires on 8 December
2021. We will also seek to establish if, at that time you will be fit enough to
participate in the investigation either by attending a meeting by MS Teams or by
providing written representations and if not, when you are likely to be fit enough.
Finally, we will seek to establish whether you are fit enough to take part in any
further meetings. This will obviously be subject to the findings and
recommendations detailed in the final investigation report.”
550. On 23 November, Ms Johnson wrote to confirm the OH appointment would be
a telephone appointment on the claimant’s work mobile. It was due to take place with
Dr Gupta of Medigold at 9 a.m. on 7 December 2021.
551. The management OH referral (pp.823-826) asked for answers to a list of
questions which included confirmation of the claimant’s treatment plan and prognosis,
when he was expected to return to work and what adjustments were needed to
facilitate that. It asked about his ability to attend a formal HR hearing, either by MS
Teams or in writing and what adjustments might be needed to facilitate that. We find
the questions were relatively standard questions which an employer would ask in these
circumstances. The exception was question 4:
4. Why did Mr Turner confirm he was fit for work on 08.11.21 in his return to
work meeting and then say he was unfit for work on 10.11.21?
552. Although we accept the claimant’s evidence that he was in principle open to the
idea of an OH assessment we also find that the claimant was only happy to undergo
such an assessment on his own terms. In particular, he had to be satisfied that that
the person carrying it out had what the claimant deemed to be sufficient understanding
of Autism. That is apparent from the letters he sent to Medigold on 1 December.
553. On that date, the claimant sent 2 letters to Medigold. Both were marked
“Strictly private and confidential” and specified that they were not to be shared with
any third party or the claimant’s employer.
554. The first letter authorised the claimant’s wife to correspond with Medigold on
his behalf to try and keep his stress to a minimum. He included email addresses for
the claimant and his wife but said there was no consent to use them to book or
facilitate an OH appointment “if I agree and there is a suitable specialist”. Any
appointment details were to be sent by post.
555. The second letter was from the claimant’s wife. The letter summarised the
claimant’s current situation. It said the claimant had not had any direct contact with
Medigold about the upcoming appointment and it had not been discussed or agreed
with him. It said the claimant had been signed off until mid-January 2022 and would
not be in a fit state to engage with the investigation at that time. In addition to
stressing the need for the claimant to be in a good mental state to deal with the
investigation the letter said that he would need to “cross check if the actual
instigation of the investigation is not unlawful victimisation or discrimination for
exercising protected acts. This is a formidable task against the seemingly pressured
approach of his employer since his cancer diagnosis and one the claimant could not
106

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
rise to at this time because of his very low stress threshold”. In those circumstances
the letter suggested that any occupational health assessment “incorrectly carried out
by an under qualified and untrained practitioner” thereby “misinforming my husband's
employer” may have severe consequences on the claimant's future health career. It
said that “this would leave both his employer and [Medigold] open to legal challenge
with regards to the Equality Act 2010 and negligence due to his dual disabilities of
cancer and Autism”.
556. The letter then set out in specific, prescriptive terms the steps which Medigold
was required to take to satisfy the claimant that it had the necessary expertise to
carry out the proposed OH Assessment. It asked for specific details of Dr Gupta’s
qualifications and experience and proof of the same. That included relevant
experience with Autism “especially high functioning Autism, the complexities of such
in professional role and psychological interactions with stress. The experience with
psychological effects of cancer and life threatening conditions.” The letter required
“direct written confirmation from the doctor that they're qualified to carry out the
specialist assessment and why”. If that information was provided “the claimant will
consider Dr Gupta's suitability to assess him at a future date. We will also reach out
on requested adaptations for the assessment”.
557. If Dr Gupta was not a specialist and there were no other suitable practitioners
at Medigold the claimant suggested that Medigold contact the respondent to inform it
that they couldn't offer the expertise. The letter reiterated that the claimant did not
consent to sharing any information with the respondent unless he had approved doing
so specifically in writing and warned that at some future point the claimant might issue
a DSAR to Medigold to review all personal information and correspondence regarding
him including the referral.
558. On 1 December 2021 the claimant’s GP provided a further fit note which signed
him off work until the 16th of January 2022. The reasons given were “Squamous cell
carcinoma of tongue, autistic spectrum disorder, anxiety”. The claimant’s wife sent that
to Ms Johnson on 4 December 2021. It was sent with a letter from the claimant
authorising Mrs Turner to communicate with the respondent on his behalf and a
second, longer, letter setting out the claimant’s position.
559. In summary, that was that:
• The claimant was not well enough to take part in the investigation or return to
work. He had tried to return to work on 8 November 2021 but after 2 days of
increasing anxiety and lack of sleep had taken medical advice and was signed
off again.
• A major cause of the claimant’s stress was his being “ambushed” by being told
about the investigation at the return to work meeting. There was no mention of
the investigation prior to the meeting. As an autistic person the claimant should
have been given time to prepare for discussion of the investigation rather than
having it sprung on him.
• The claimant believed that “a truly consultative, ethical and adequately qualified
approach” to an OH health assessment would be beneficial to all but he
107

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
expected to be fully consulted before any such referral in advance, and subject
to his explicit approval and consent.
• The claimant had asked for but not received confirmation from Medigold that
Dr Gupta had the specialisms in Autism, cancer and resultant psychological
factors which the claimant deemed necessary to carry out an OH Assessment.
As a result, the OH appointment on 7 December should be cancelled.
• Medigold had been asked to demonstrate Dr Gupta's specialism to “avoid the
possibility of negligence and discrimination”. If a specialist was identified the
claimant would then request some adaptations in line with the Equality Act
2010. The correspondence with Medigold was confidential (so was not shared
with the respondent).
• The respondent’s approach of continuing with the process during his ill- health
was a “pressurised approach” rather than the caring approach to be expected
towards a long-serving employee.
• Although the claimant was open to an OH approach that was not because of
anything in a signed contract in 2006. The letter said “that contract was signed
by my husband in difficult circumstances for him with little choice at the time,
and is itself subject to English law, advances in legislation, for example GDPR
and consent, Equality act 2010 and developments in case law in the 15 years
since.”
560. Sarah Colwill (“Ms Colwill”) from Medigold responded to Mrs Turner on 7
December. She explained that since the claimant was saying he did not consent to the
OH appointment it could not proceed. She would need to contact the respondent to
explain that was the position. She stressed that the OH clinician’s role was to provide
advice where appropriate to enable a safe and timely return to work including on
functional capability to perform a role. In contrast, the referral in 2017 required an
Occupational Psychologist trained in neurodiversity so the advice given by Ms Packer
in 2017 that Medigold did not have the required specialist was correct. She confirmed
that although they did not necessarily have specialists in Autism, Medigold’s OH
physicians were experienced in advising employers on the support required for
employees including autistic employees. She said she was confident that Medigold’s
OH Consultants would be able to offer a holistic approach to the claimant’s health
conditions and the impact on his work. If and when the claimant was happy to proceed
Medigold would select one of their directly employed physicians with sufficiently broad
experience in the various conditions the claimant had. Medigold suggested a double
appointment length to allow for a full and thorough consultation.
Events leading up to the draft report
561. Between 9-13 December Ms Johnson and Mr Al-Qasmi chased Medigold for a
new OH appointment date. We find Mr Al-Qasmi was involved because Ms Johnson
was on leave for part of the time. On 13 December he asked for a new date and
further details of the OH physician being suitably qualified. He said the appointment
“needed to take place in the next 5 days”. (We find it is not clear why). On 14 December
Medigold’s Director of Client services responded to explain that they could not provide
an appointment date because they did not have the claimant’s informed consent.
108

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
562. On 14 December Medigold confirmed that Dr Rooms was available to carry out
the OH assessment either on 16 or 22 December. Mr Al-Qasmi suggested 22
December because 16 December would be too short notice. He asked for confirmation
that Dr Rooms was suitably qualified. Medigold replied the same day to confirm that
while its OH Consultants did not have a specific qualification in the various health
conditions mentioned, Dr Rooms has vast experience in providing an holistic approach
where multiple conditions were referred. It said he had experience of the conditions
mentioned and was very familiar in advising organisations on the necessary support
employers may need to consider when supporting and managing individuals with
those conditions in the workplace. Medigold also confirmed that Dr Rooms was one of
its senior OH Physicians.
563. We find that Mr Al-Qasmi was involved in liaising with Ms Jones. He and Ms
Jones had a catch up call on 15 December 2021 (p.855). Ms Jones was keen to ensure
that the investigation be concluded in a reasonable timeframe. She proposed that to
move the investigation on, the claimant would be sent Ms Jones’s draft report (but
without the appendices which included the supporting evidential documents which
would be shared with the final report ). She proposed that the claimant be given until
24 December to respond to written questions. Ms Jones sent a draft of her letter with
questions to the claimant to Ms Johnson on 15 December. Ms Johnson did not at that
point send the letter out because she had written that day to the claimant about the
rearranged OH appointment on 22 December. She confirmed to Ms Jones she would
let her know the response to that invitation and send Ms Jones’s letter to the claimant
once she had the response.
564. Ms Johnson’s letter to Mrs Turner on 15 December confirmed a telephone OH
assessment on 22 December 2021. Ms Johnson explained that having considered the
points made in Mrs Turner's letter of the 4 December she did not accept that a
specialist in Autism, cancer and resulting psychological factors in a senior role was
required in this case. That was because what the respondent was seeking was a report
from an OH specialist in order to understand the claimant's fitness to take part in the
investigation process. By way of reassurance, she set out the information Medigold
had provided about Dr Rooms’s experience. She explained that once the OH
appointment had taken place and depending on the resulting report, the claimant
would be given an opportunity to meet with Ms Jones to comment on the investigation
report. Alternatively, as a further adaptation the claimant could provide written
representations. The letter made clear that if the claimant did not attend the OH
appointment the respondent would have to decide how to progress the investigation
report and any follow up meetings without the benefits of OH input. It therefore strongly
encouraged the claimant to attend the OH appointment. (p.858).
565. It appears from subsequent correspondence that the letter was not received by
the claimant or his wife because there was no one in to sign for it when it was delivered.
It had not been collected when Mrs Turner wrote her next letter to Medigold so she
was not aware of the appointment.
566. Mrs Turner wrote on 19 December to Ms Colwill in response to Medigold’s letter
of 7 December. In summary, Mrs Turner:
109

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• repeated the demand for specific evidence that whichever practitioner carried
out the OH assessment had the specialism in Autism the claimant required.
• said the claimant queried the reference to a “holistic” approach with some
concern stressing that any approach must be “robust”, constitute a nationally
recognisable and defined occupational health assessment and stand up to
expert scrutiny.
• queried the distinction drawn between the current assessment and that made
in 2017 and the suggestion that it required more expertise because it was a
diagnosis. Mrs Turner pointed out (correctly we find) that the claimant had
already been diagnosed when Medigold was approached. As a result, Mrs
Turner said the claimant was concerned about what had been communicated
previously by the respondent and to obtain transparency he asked for the
referrals made by the respondent in 2017 and in 2021 together with any
supplementary information.
• said that while she realised that Medigold medical was trying to provide
suitable services in good faith to an ethical standard if it could not or would not
demonstrate the specialism required it should avoid unnecessary delay by
telling the claimant and the respondent so. They could then agree on an
alternative appropriate provider.
• asked that no assessment invites be sent to the claimant until it was clear that
his consent had been gained as that would be considered “unnecessary
disturbance of his recovery”.
567. We find that although the tone of the letter was more conciliatory than the
letter of the 1 December 2021, the substance of the demands made of Medigold
remained the same.
568. On 20 December, Medigold’s Client Relationship Manager contacted Ms
Johnson to recommend the OH appointment be cancelled. In the follow up email
Medigold explained that was because it had been in discussions with the claimant
and his wife about the need for the assessment to be carried out by an OH clinician
with Autism specialism. That was not something Medigold could facilitate across its
clinical team.
569. Rather than delay the investigation process further waiting for the OH
Assessment issue to be resolved, the respondent decided to adopt Ms Jones’s
proposed approach of sending the claimant her draft report and asking for his written
comments. On 22 December Ms Johnson sent him the draft report without
appendices. Noting that the claimant had refused to consent to the OH assessment
she explained in her covering letter that a decision had had to be made as to how to
progress the investigation without the benefit of OH input. Ms Jones was keen to get
the claimant’s input but due to the reason for his absence did not feel that a meeting
was the appropriate way to do that. Instead, she had decided that the claimant
should be given the opportunity to provide his comments in writing. Ms Johnson
confirmed that the respondent agreed with Ms Jones’s approach.
110

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
570. The letter asked the claimant to review the report and provide his views and
comments. It also asked for his response to specific questions:
“• Why did you decide to email Britta Fuenfstueck whilst the grievance appeal
process was still taking place?
• What outcome did you expect from Britta?
• Can you provide a summary of how you see the relationship between you and
the senior leadership team now and going forward?
• In reflecting on the report, are you able to share your thoughts and views on
the impact caused by your correspondence and approach particularly towards
Richard and Abid (as they are the ones you name in your email to Britta)?”
571. The claimant was given until the 3rd of January 2022 to provide his comments.
The letter confirmed that If the respondent did not hear back by then Ms Jones might
choose to finalise her report without the claimant’s input. Ms Johnson confirmed that
depending on the outcome of the report the potential next step was for the claimant to
be invited to a hearing to consider the report and its findings and recommendations.
The Draft Report and the claimant’s response to it
The draft report
572. Ms Jones’s 7 page draft report was clearly structured and, we find, accurately
reported the evidence from her investigation interviews. She included, for example,
Mr Cornwell’s positive evidence about the claimant being “delightful” when engaged
and happy in his work (para 16).at She identified the purpose of the investigation as
being to look into whether the relationship between the claimant and the
respondent’s 3 statutory directors and Mr Al-Qasmi had irretrievably broken down.
She referred to Mr Cornwell having formally logged a grievance as a result of the 3
September 2021 email because it undermined the ongoing grievance appeal
process and the senior management team.
573. Ms Jones made it clear in her report that the conclusions in her draft were
provisional. However, in places she expressed what appear to be concluded views,
e.g. that Mr Cornwell’s grievance “was upheld”. Ms Jones made clear that the aim was
to share it with the claimant and seek his views so that his views could be taken on
board before the final recommendations or actions were finalised.
574. Ms Jones set out her overall conclusion in an executive summary:
“My conclusion is that the working relationship between [the claimant] and the
statutory board has broken down irretrievably. [the claimant’s] approach and
conduct towards decisions and reasonable challenges of his work or actions is not
in my view acceptable . His personal conduct towards others has caused stress
and significant impact on the individuals concerned. There is acknowledgement
and clear support of his disability, which I have found to be considerable
amongst the directors and [Mr Al-Qasmi]. I would also expect greater respect
111

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
and professionalism from [the claimant] in his dealings with colleagues,
managers and the organisation as a whole.”
575. Ms Jones confirmed that she had worked with colleagues with Autism and so
had some knowledge and understanding in how to engage and adapt her own style
and approach as necessary. She acknowledged that was important. Everybody was
different and a single approach would not work with everyone.
576. Ms Jones set out her conclusions at paragraphs 29-34 of the draft. In summary:
• All 4 interviewees had provided a significant amount of support to the
claimant. Ms Jones's view they had gone beyond what was reasonable.
• All 4 had been supportive of the claimant’s diagnosis. The only frustration was
his reluctance to share his diagnosis more widely. That was the claimant’s
right but meant that there were limits on what could be done to enable
colleagues unaware of it to better understand how to work with him.
• Each time an issue was raised by the claimant, time was taken to understand
what the issue was, identify the underlying concerns and navigate carefully
through difficulties to get a resolution. Significant time was spent in pondering
over communications to the claimant to make sure it was received correctly.
• Resolution of some of the issues compromised business decisions. The need
to prevent and limit the claimant’s threats to raise grievances, go to ACAS or
raise Tribunal claims had resulted in senior leaders “giving in” to the claimant,
compromising their own judgement and decision making. All recognised the
rights of employees to disagree with decisions being taken but in the claimant’s
case it was “the tone and approach that had become increasingly difficult”.
• The respondent had attempted to create a positive working environment by
arranging for the workplace assessment by Aspiedent. The fact the claimant
didn't engage with the recommendations was disappointing.
• There was sufficient evidence that's the working relationships had broken
down. The claimant’s conduct and behaviour throughout the examples given
indicating a lack of respect and trust. His conduct had also had a significant
personal and professionally impact, causing stress and compromising the
senior leaders’ ability to carry out the work they were employed to do.
• Corresponding directly with Ms Fuenfstueck during an ongoing process
indicated the claimant did not place any value in the employment process he
had started. He had issues with Mr Coupe and Mr Cornwell and had also
questioned the credibility and approach of Mrs Deakin and Mr Al-Qasmi. The
respondent’s statutory management structure and level of the claimant’s role
in the business meant there was no one else he could now report into. Mr Al-
Qasmi's evidence was clear that the claimant needed to have a good working
relationship within the UK team and Ms Jones's view was the claimant had
damaged those relationships.
112

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
577. In her report, Ms Jones referred to the examples of challenges cited by the
interviewees. That included the recent car repair and tax code issues with Mr Coupe,
the 2018 and 2019 bonus issues, transition to One IT and the email exchange with Mr
Cornwell on 24 September 2021. The report said it was apparent from all 4
interviewees that the claimant would “become aggressive in both tone, language and
approach when presented with any feedback or challenge that he did not like”. Ms
Jones referred to the claimant’s response to the car repair issue as “somewhat
confrontational”. Mr Cornwell was recorded as referring to the claimant’s “aggressive
style (in the context of his response to Mr Cornwell’s 24 September email). Mrs Deakin
was reported as referring to the claimant’s response to her challenge to him about the
GDPR meeting as “confrontational”.
578. We find those provisional conclusions (including her overall conclusion) were
reasonable conclusions for Ms Jones to draw based on the evidence before her at that
point.
579. In light of her conclusions, Ms Jones’s draft said she upheld Mr Cornwell’s
grievance. She stressed the need for the claimant to provide his view on the report.
However, unless there was substantial evidence to counter the evidence shared, Ms
Jones could not see how the relationship could be repaired. She did not believe any
action such as mediation would assist either party. She recommended that
consideration be given to ending the employment relationship. To do that the
claimant must be invited to a meeting where dismissal on the basis of some other
substantial reason could be a potential outcome. At that meeting the claimant would
have the opportunity to make representations before a final decision was made.
The claimant’s response
580. Mrs Turner responded in writing on 31 December 2021 (p.876). It was sent
by post only. Mrs Turner explained that that was by way of an “adaptation” to avoid
stress and “emotional communications in a compromised state”. The letter was said
to be in the spirit of helping the respondent to “avoid potential unlawful activity based
on incorrect advice, misinformation or misunderstanding” and confirmed the claimant
desired the best working relationship possible. She referred to the claimant’s emails
on 8 and 9 November 2021 in which he had explained the context for the 3
September email and proposed mediation. She confirmed the claimant’s continued
openness to an OH assessment. She said that she was in dialogue with Medigold to
seek to facilitate such an assessment by a suitably qualified medical practitioner (a
reference, we find, to her letter of 19 December 2021 to Medigold).
581. Mrs Turner explained the claimant was not fit enough to engage with the
investigation but noted that the timeline covered by the investigation had “spiralled
beyond” that referred to in Mr Al Qasmi’s letter of 8 November 2021. She stressed
the impact of the claimant’s Autism on his behaviour and denied that he rejected the
Aspiedent report (only disagreed with some sections). He pointed out that his OneIT
role meant there was limited day to day contact with the UK SMT and that meant
there was limited ability to compensate and create understanding within the UK
management team.
582. Mrs Turner summarised the claimant’s position as being that he had sent an
email while he had cancer which unintentionally offended his line manager. He
understood there would need to be a discussion on his return to work but could not
113

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
understand the justification for the events that were happening. She set out the
devastating impact on the claimant and his family were he to be dismissed. She said
that every advice she had received so far indicated that dismissal was not the right
course of action given the circumstances and the constructive attitude of the claimant
toward greater understanding. She made it clear that a dismissal would result in a
Tribunal claim and implored the respondent to think carefully and act with compassion
and understanding.
Events in January 2022 - the final report, hearing and ongoing attempt to set up an
OH Assessment
583. Because Mrs Turner's letter was sent by post only it was not received by the 3
January deadline. On 4 January 2022 Ms Johnson wrote to the claimant extending
the deadline for comments to the 7 January. She stressed again that if no response
was received Ms Jones may decide to finalise her report without the claimant’s input.
She sent the letter by post addressed to the claimant with a covering letter to Mrs
Turner asking her to pass it on. She also emailed it to the claimant’s work email.
584. Ms Johnson had received Mrs Turner’s letter by the 6 January 2022. We find
she was confused by the reference to there being an ongoing dialogue with
Medigold. She had understood from the e-mail on the 20 December 2021 that
Medigold could not facilitate the proposed occupational health assessment.
585. Ms Johnson spoke to Ms Colwill at Medigold on the 6 January. She confirmed
that having shared the referral with Medigold’s Medical Director and Chief Medical
Officer, Doctor Williams, he was comfortable that one of their senior consultants (Dr
Rooms) would be happy to undertake the referral. Ms Colwill confirmed she would e-
mail Mrs Turner on the 7 January 2022 to confirm that was the case.
586. On 11 January, Mrs Turner sent Ms Johnson a fit note signing the claimant off
work for a further 7 weeks from that date because of “Squamous cell carcinoma of
tongue. Autistic spectrum disorder. Anxiety.”
Finalising the Report
587. Ms Jones worked with Ms Johnson to finalise her report. Ms Johnson sent her
the emails on the 8th and 9th of November referred to in Mrs Turner's letter of the
31st of December. The final report was dated 13 January 2022.
588. Ms Jones added an addendum to her report at paragraphs 38-43. In that
section she considered the points made in Mrs Turner's letter of 31 December. In
summary, she concluded that:
• On the suggestion that the scope of the investigation had “spiralled”, the
investigation was to consider the working relationship which meant that events
leading up to the 3 September 2021 e-mail had been considered
• On the suggestion that the claimant was not fit to engage and was therefore
unable to feedback on the report’s legitimacy, validity or accuracy: options had
been given to the claimant to enable him to engage with the process. In
114

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
addition, correspondence was still ongoing with Medigold regarding an OH
appointment with Dr Rooms
• The fact that the claimant’s disability affected the claimant’s communication
style and that that could be exacerbated by stress and anxiety was something
which had been recognised, understood and actively supported by the
leadership team.
• The claimant suggestion that although he did not agree with all parts of the
Aspiedent report he did not reject it was not easy to square that with the
evidence about the claimant’s engagement with Aspiedent. That indicated the
claimant did not agree with report’s outcome and did not wish to engage in the
recommendations made.
• The limited nature of the claimant’s contact with the UK management team
was not something which could be given significant weight. Even allowing for
the matrix management arrangement the claimant still had regular
engagement with the UK leadership team.
• On the claimant suggestion that he was 100% committed to a good working
relationship and offered mediation: that offer was made in the context of an e-
mail where the claimant had made a tribunal claim, accused Mr Cornwell of
using inappropriate routes to deal with the issue and of carrying out an illegal
act in considering dismissing him. Ms Jones’s view was that did not illustrate a
conciliatory and positive approach to potential mediation or resolution.
589. Having taken into account the claimant's response Ms Jones confirmed that
her view that the working relationship had broken down and that it was not
retrievable. Her finding remained the same as in the draft report, i.e. that the
grievance by Mr Cornwell was upheld and that a meeting should be held to consider
whether the claimant should be dismissed on the basis of SOSR.
590. The final report included 49 appendices. They included copies of the
claimant’s 2018 and 2021 Tribunal claims and responses, email exchanges relevant
to the examples discussed in the investigation interviews and report and the
correspondence about the investigation emails in November and December 2021.
The email exchanges relating to the Aspiedent report were also included.
The hearing invite and response
591. Ms Johnson wrote to the claimant on 13 January 2022 to invite him to a
hearing on 26 January 2022 to be chaired by Mr Marquard. She explained that in the
absence of comments on the report by the extended deadline of the 7 January 2025
a decision had been made to finalise the investigation report. She explained that at
the hearing Ms Jones would present the report findings and recommendations. The
claimant would then have an opportunity to respond. She enclosed a copy of the
report, witness statements/interview notes and the appendices to the report.
592. The letter proposed 3 “options and adaptations” to enable the claimant to
participate in the hearing. They were (i) that the claimant attend via MS Teams with a
workplace colleague or trade union representative as his companion (ii) that he
115

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
attend the hearing via MS Teams with Mrs Turner as his companion (iii) that the
claimant provide written representations to Mr Marquard prior to the meeting for his
consideration. The letter made clear that the respondent would consider any other
suggestions the claimant wished to make.
593. Ms Johnson noted that the claimant had so far refused the respondents
request to engage with the senior physician appointed by Medigold to carry out an
OH assessment. She confirmed the purpose of the assessment would be to provide
the respondent with advice on the claimant's capability to participate in the hearing
and to suggest any adjustments that should be made to support that participation.
She encouraged the claimant to reconsider his refusal.
594. The letter confirmed that if the claimant was prepared to agree to attend an
appointment with Medigold the respondent would postpone the hearing until it had
considered the resulting OH report. Ms Johnson asked the claimant to confirm by 18
January 2022 if he agreed to attend an OH assessment. If he did not do so then she
asked him to confirm by the 19 January which of the 3 options proposed he would
prefer.
595. The letter warned the claimant that if he did not respond to the letter, failed to
provide written representations or attend the hearing it might go ahead in his
absence. It also confirmed that due to the nature of the allegations the hearing could
result in the claimant's dismissal on the grounds of some other substantial reason.
596. On the 18 January 2022 Ms Johnson wrote to the claimant to notify him that
his entitlement to company sick pay would no longer be payable from 4 March 2022.
She explained he may be entitled to payments under the Group Income Protection
scheme and sent him the relevant claim form to complete (pp.906-913).
597. The claimant responded to the invitation letter on 19 January 2022. In a letter
received by Ms Johnson on the 20 January he explained that he was overwhelmed
by the paperwork sent to him and not currently in a fit state to process and respond
to it. He said he would be able to do so given time after his health had recovered. He
also informed Ms Johnson that he and his wife had received news that their son had
passed away the previous week. He asked for compassion and explained there
would be a at least a two week delay before he could correspond again. That was to
give him time to deal with family circumstances and to try and take the rest he'd been
advised to take.
598. In his letter, the claimant expressed the view that the proportionate way to
proceed would be to explore the influence of his disabilities on the 3 September
2021 e-mail stressing that it was sent while he was ill with cancer and immediately
before his operation. He proposed that where his previous communications had
been “misinterpreted or incorrectly ascribed a malicious intent by others” they could
be explained in context both by himself and medical expert if required.
599. The claimant confirmed he remained open to a telephone assessment by a
senior OH practitioner who could demonstrate in advance their expertise in Autism.
He asked Ms Johnson to prompt Ms Colwill at Medigold to respond to his wife's letter
of 19 December.
116

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
600. The claimant suggested it was not too late to step back from what would be
“an unfair outcome” and that with “education, medical expertise and dialogue, it is
possible for my colleagues and I to understand each other better in trust and
confidence”. He suggested that his ongoing medication would also serve a role in
future by hopefully lowing his lowering his stress levels which might assist in his
communications. He stressed the impact on his family if he were dismissed and said
that given the many other options available and his constructive attitude it would
effectively be a dismissal because he was ill and disabled or had carried out
protected act linked to those disabilities. He asked respondent to find “another
reasonable way”.
Postponement of the hearing and attempts to arrange the OH appointment
601. Having taken legal advice, Ms Johnson proposed to Mr Marquard that the
hearing be postponed to the end of February. That was to enable an OH
appointment with an independent doctor to take place in the first week of February
with the report to be prepared by mid-February. She suggested the hearing would
ideally take place in the week of the 21 February 2022. Mr Marquard agreed.
602. Ms Johnson then got back in touch with Ms Colwill at Medigold confirming the
claimant had agreed to an OH appointment and asking her to set it up. She
explained that due to the claimant’s personal circumstances that could not take place
before 31 January but asked that it take place by 4 February. She noted that the
claimant was still saying he wanted the practitioner to demonstrate their expertise in
Autism but explained that the respondent would like to give him one final opportunity
to attend a Medigold OH appointment.
603. Ms Colwill proposed a 90 minute telephone consultation with Dr Rooms on 1 or
8 of February. Ms Johnson asked that both slots be held. On 21 January she emailed
the claimant and Mrs Turner to confirm the telephone appointment with Dr Rooms on
1 February. She said she understood the claimant was now happy to progress with
the offer of an appointment and asked for various details so that copies of the referral
documents could be sent to the claimant as previously requested.
604. On 25 January 2022 Ms Johnson wrote to the claimant in response to his letter
of the 19 January. We find she had not received it when she wrote on 21 January. She
expressed her sincere condolences on the death of his son. She confirmed the hearing
on 26 January would be postponed and noted the 2-week delay for any further
response requested by the claimant. She confirmed that because the claimant said in
his letter that he was open to attending an OH appointment one had been set up for
the 1 February with Dr Rooms. Given it was a difficult time for the claimant she
confirmed she had also asked Medigold to also hold 8 February as an alternative
appointment date. She asked the claimant to confirm as soon as possible which of
those dates he would prefer. She checked that the claimant had no objection to Dr
Rooms being sent the Aspiedent report. She confirmed she would send it to Medigold
unless she heard to the contrary from the claimant by the end of the week. She
confirmed that, subject to the OH report, they had rearranged the hearing with Mr
Marquard for 17 February 2022. She provided details of the employee assistance
programme.
117

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
605. The claimant did not respond to either Medigold or Ms Johnson so the proposed
OH appointment on 1 February 2022 did not take place.
8 February 2022 - the claimant’s solicitor’s letter and subsequent events leading to the
hearing
606. The next communication from the claimant was a solicitor’s letter on 8 Feb. It
was emailed to Mr Cornwell, Mr Coupe, Mrs Deakin, Mr Al-Qasmi, Ms Johnson, Mr
Marquard and Ms Fuenfstueck.
607. Having set out a narrative of events the letter highlighted 3 “areas of concern”.
In summary:
• The launching of an investigation: the claimant’s 3 September e-mail was
entirely appropriate and understandable in the circumstances. The reaction of
Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi in “deciding to take legal advice with a view to
removing [the claimant] from his role” was disproportionate and showed a
complete disregard for the nature of the claimant’s condition. It was clearly
inappropriate for Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi to lead an investigation into
the claimant following the e-mail
• The nature of investigation: the investigation was characterised as a “fishing
expedition” searching for evidence that the claimant had been a difficult
employee. Ms Jones was said to have no real expertise or knowledge of
Autism and so to be unqualified to assess whether adequate support had
been provided to the claimant. There had been no regard to the welfare of the
claimant from the way he was told about the investigation at his return to
work, repeatedly contacting him about the investigation when off sick and only
postponing the hearing with Mr Marquard for 3 weeks when informed of the
death of the claimant's son.
• The outcome of the investigation: the investigation listed a series of vague
criticisms of the claimant’s conduct. In summary the report's conclusion was
that the working relationship had broken down as a result of the claimant
raising his concerns about discrimination by his managers and as a result of
his manner of communication (which resulted from his Autism). A dismissal in
those circumstances would be unfair. Contrary to Ms Jones’s view, the fact
that the claimant did not work with the UK directors day-to-day was a
significant factor. He had a good working relationship with the global team and
recommendation for dismissal because the working relationship with the UK
statutory board had broken down made no sense.
608. The letter asserted that the events described were clear acts of discrimination
in breach of sections 15,20, 26 and 27 of the Equality Act 2010. It said that if the
claimant was dismissed that would also be an unfair dismissal. The claimant
reserved his right to bring additional claims against the respondent.
609. The letter made a DSAR for any documents or communications relating to the
claimant’s pay, communications with Ms Jones relating to the investigation and
communications relating to training the respondent’s managers about Autism in order
to better manage support and understand the claimant.
118

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
610. In a final section headed “Current Position” the letter asserted that it appeared
the claimant was being managed out of the business because of the way he
expressed himself and his previous complaints of discrimination. It said the
claimant’s priority was to reach agreement on a number of matters to help the
working relationship move forward. It set out a list of formal requests. They were:
a) The hearing of 17 February 2022 must be immediately and permanently
suspended. The threat of an SOSR dismissal must be retracted.
b) The retraction of the Report and an apology for the impact the investigation
process has had on our client's mental health.
c) An assurance that our client will be supported in returning to his role when
his fit note runs out on 1 March 2022 and then be appropriately supported in his
role.
d) An assurance that Mr AI-Qasmi and the statutory board will undergo
training relating to managing and working with individuals with autism within
the next three months.
e) An OH assessment to be set up with a practitioner with a demonstrated
understanding of autism, who is able to provide a short personal statement and a
list of training to evidence this understanding.
f) If it is the view of the statutory board of PH that there are serious issues with
the way in which our client expresses himself in writing, an assurance that this
will be formally raised with our client and different forms of support be
explored. For example, a support worker could be engaged to review our client's
emails and work with him on his tone.
g) An internal investigation to be conducted into the disproportionate and
harmful reaction of PH to the Email, to prevent these mistakes ever happening
again.
611. In a letter to the claimant on 9 February Ms Johnson confirmed the hearing
on 17 February would proceed. She noted that it was clear from the claimant’s
solicitor’s letter that the claimant would not attend an OH appointment without
additional assurances about the qualifications and experience of the OH physician.
The respondent considered those requirements unreasonable in light of the
assurances already provided by Medigold. She repeated the offer of adaptations
made in the letter of 13 January 2022. She confirmed any written representation
should be made by 15 February. She confirmed that Mr Marquard would consider
the claimant’s solicitor’s letter as part of the process. The respondent's solicitors
wrote to the claimant’s solicitor in similar terms on 10 February.
612. Ms Jones provided her general comments on the claimant’s solicitor’s letter
on 10 February 2022 (p.937). She said that since the 3 September email was not an
isolated incident it was appropriate to look at previous incidents, given that Mr
Cornwell’s grievance was that the working relationship with the claimant had broken
down. She said the claimant was entitled to form a view about her experience in
119

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
being able to understand Autism but she believed she had given careful
consideration to the information (as set out in the appendix to her Report) to make a
reasoned outcome for next steps. She addressed the allegations of discrimination
and victimisation in her final para:
“It is important to be clear that no conclusions have been made to consider the
dismissal of CT because he has raised concerns about discrimination. The
conclusions reached are about the way CT engages and communicates with the
senior leadership team and Board. It is also important to clarify that due to the
statutory management structure CT must report to a Board member. Whether
this is on a day to day basis or not - any form of engagement must be
constructive and positive, evidence has shown that this invariably is not the
case.”
613. There was a further exchange of letters between the parties’ solicitors on the
11 and 15 of February. The claimant’s solicitor requested that the respondent write to
them rather than direct to the claimant because of his ill health. The respondent’s
solicitor confirmed the respondent agreed to do so while noting that it was entitled to
correspond directly with its employee.
614. In its letter on 11 February, the claimant's solicitor asserted that it would be a
reasonable adjustment for the claimant to undergo an OH assessment with a
practitioner with a demonstrated understanding of Autism who was able to provide a
short personal statement about their relevant experience and list their training and
qualifications. It suggested the respondent obtain that information from Medigold or
alternatively engage a different OH provider. It suggested Fusion Occupational
Health as an alternative provider.
615. The respondent’s solicitor set out the steps the respondent had taken to try
and arrange an OH assessment and reassure the claimant about the expertise of the
OH physician. It said that despite those attempts the claimant was not willing to
commit to attend the appointment without placing “unreasonable and onerous
obstacles in the way”. In those circumstances, they confirmed the respondent had
decided it was reasonable for the hearing on the 17 February to proceed. The
deadline for any written representations was extended from noon on the 15 February
to 10:00 on the following day. Included with that letter was Ms Jones's note 10
February 2022 in response to the 8 February letter. They were shared so that the
claimant could comment on them.
616. Ms Johnson had since 14 February been chasing Medigold for details of Dr
Rooms’s qualifications and experience. Ms Colwill emailed her on 17 February (after
the hearing with Mr Marquard had taken place) to confirm he was a senior Member
of the Faculty of Occupational Medicine, a qualified OH Physician ad recognised by
the GMC as an Accredited Specialist in OH. She confirmed that although Medigold’s
consultants were not specialists in Autism, they had considerable experience in
understanding Autism and the impact it may have on an individual’s work.
The hearing on 17 February 2022 and the decision to dismiss
The hearing on 17 February
120

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
617. The 17 February hearing took place by Teams. Mr Marquard, Ms Jones and
Ms Johnson attended separately. The claimant had been sent the link to the
meeting.
618. The meeting was due to start by 1 p.m. The claimant had not attended by 1:06
p.m. Mr Marquard decided to continue with the meeting in his absence. His view was
that the respondent had given the claimant every opportunity to participate. He was
aware of and had supported the approach taken by Ms Johnson to obtain an OH
report on the claimant’s ability to take part in the process. He shared the view that
the claimant’s preconditions for undertaking such an assessment were
unreasonable.
619. Ms Jones presented her report and explained her conclusion that the working
relationship had broken down. We find Mr Marquard questioned her on a number of
points. We find that questioning took into account points raised in the claimant’s
solicitor’s letter of 8 February:
• Mr Marquard asked whether it was normal practice in the UK to appoint an
independent consultant to conduct an investigation Ms Jones confirmed it
was.
• The scope of the investigation was raised. Ms Jones explained that in order to
assess whether the relationship had broken down she had to consider the 3
September email in context to understand whether it was a one-off or part of a
pattern.
• Mr Marquard asked whether it was normal or considered acceptable in the UK
for people to reach out to a higher level whilst a grievance process was
running. Ms Jones confirmed it was not wrong for the claimant to seek advice.
He could have reached out to Mr Marquard as Mr Cornwell’s line manager if
he had concerns. Had he done so he would have been advised to await the
outcome of the process. Ms Jones’s view was that the claimant had
undermined the process by sending the 3 September email to Ms
Fuenfstueck.
• Ms Jones said that there was a pattern of behaviour of the claimant being very
defensive when challenged. Even recognising and acknowledging his
disability her view was that did not excuse the behaviour displayed by the
claimant. Her view was that the feedback given to the claimant was not
unreasonable and that there had been positive engagement with him. She
cited the claimant’s response to the respondent’s attempts to arrange an OH
assessment issue as an example of the claimant being unreasonable and
unprofessional.
• Mr Marquard asked Ms Jones in her experience of Autism what steps the UK
senior management team had taken to adapt to the claimant and how that
compared to other companies. Ms Jones’s view was that all the senior
management team had been exceptional with regards to their adaptability,
patience and understanding. They had gone beyond what she saw as best
practice in terms of adjustments and how they worked with the claimant. In
some cases, objective business decisions were being changed. Ms Jones
121

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
expressed shock that when the claimant challenged his 2019 bonus payment
the only way Mr Cornwell felt able to placate him was to give in.
• Mr Marquard asked whether Ms Jones believed that the tone and language of
the claimant’s communications was a result of Autism or some other issues,
e.g. a lack of confidence. Ms Jones suggested that is something which the
claimant could have been asked had he chosen to attend. She suggested that
the claimant had been more conciliatory in his response to the Report which
to her mind suggested that he was able to communicate “appropriately”.
• Ms Jones expressed the view that mediation did not appear to be possibility
because both parties had to be open to it. From her review of the information,
her view was that the claimant had shown distrust of the senior management
team and was not in a positive frame of mind in relation to them.
620. Mr Marquard told Ms Jones for the first time during the meeting that Mr
Cornwell was leaving the business. He asked if that changed the situation. Ms Jones
agreed that added a new dimension to matters. Her overall view was that the
claimant had shown little respect and judgement towards the company as a whole
and the same issues would persist unless there was a change in the claimant’s
conduct. Ms Jones said she believed that this would be difficult to impose on a new
Managing Director, but it would need to be considered. The claimant might well
report into that new Managing Director, but he would need to engage with the whole
of the senior management team. The new Managing Director would need to focus on
the business as a whole, not on one individual.
621. The meeting finished at 1:49 p.m. Mr Marquard decided he needed further
time to consider his decision.
Mr Marquard’s decision and the outcome letter of 24 February 2022 (pp.959 – 965)
622. Mr Marquard decided to dismiss the claimant. He set out his decision and the
reasons for it in a letter to the claimant dated 24 February 2022. The claimant was
dismissed with effect from the date of that letter with 3 months’ pay in lieu of notice.
The ground for the dismissal was that the working relationship between him and the
UK Senior Management Team had broken down irretrievably and that that amounted
to some other substantial reason justifying his dismissal.
623. We find that Ms Johnson may have helped with the wording of the letter (it used
the phrase “reached the end of the road” which Mr Marquard confirmed in evidence
he was not familiar with). However, we accept his evidence that it was his decision to
dismiss and that the letter accurately recorded the reasons for that decision.
624. We find that in reaching his decision Mr Marquard relied heavily on Ms Jones’s
Report and her presentation of it at the hearing. To some extent, that was inevitable.
The claimant was not present. She was the person who had investigated matters and
she had greater knowledge of UK employment law and HR practice than Mr Marquard.
Although he had access to the Appendices to the Report, including the witness
statements/notes from the interviews Ms Jones conducted and various emails we find
on balance that he did not read those Appendices in great detail. It is clear from his
questions to Ms Jones that he did take into account the points made in the claimant’s
122

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
solicitor’s letter dated 8 February 2022. He took into account the answers Ms Jones
gave to his questions arising from the points in that letter. We find that Mr Marquard
had read the Aspiedent report prior to the hearing. We accept his evidence that he did
not weigh the contents of the Aspiedent report very heavily. We find that was because
the claimant himself had raised concerns about it. Without the claimant being present
to explain his concerns, we find Mr Marquard was not clear which aspects of the report
could be relied on. We find he did take into account of the claimant‘s diagnosis but he
was clear in his cross-examination evidence that he did not have a detailed knowledge
of Autism and its effects.
625. In the letter, Mr Marquard explained his decision to proceed in the absence of
the claimant. He noted that the respondent had wanted to obtain professional OH
advice about the claimant’s ability to participate and to recommend reasonable
adjustments to facilitate that participation. The respondent’s view was that the
claimant’s refusal to do attend an OH appointment was unreasonable given the
assurances he was provided with. Mr Marquard’s view was that the claimant had
been given every opportunity to provide his input into the process.
626. In summary, Mr Marquard’s findings were that:
• the UK senior management team members had gone beyond what would
normally be expected in the steps they took to understand the claimant’s
diagnosis and to support him. He accepted Ms Jones’s characterisation of it
as a “gold plated” standard of support.
• the more the management team had tried to adapt the more negative the
claimant’s interactions had become evidenced by his “aggressive and
threatening tone and approach in his communications” which Mr Marquard
found to be “unreasonable, even taking into account [the claimant’s disability]
disability”.
• by emailing Ms Fuenfstueck on 3 September using the terms he did,
bypassing Mr Marquard and Mr Marquard’s line manager, Mr Georgelin, the
claimant had undermined the grievance appeal process and those involved in
it.
• the claimant had made serious allegations about Mr Cornwell and Mr. Al-
Qasmi which Mr Marquard considered to be extremely undermining. The
claimant had also lost trust in Mr Coupe and questioned Mrs Deakin’s
professionalism and integrity. The relationship with the whole UK
management team was damaged beyond repair.
• Mr Marquard had taken into account that Mr Cornwell was leaving the
company shortly. He took the view that while the claimant might not report into
the new MD he would still need to engage positively with the UK senior
management team. It was not reasonable to expect a new MD to ”have to
focus on resolving historical issues”.
• Mr Marquard had considered whether the claimant could report into someone
outside the UK senior management team. His view was that it was not. The
123

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
way OneIT was set up all country IT employees had legally to report to their
country’s management structure, Even with Mr Cornwell’s departure that was
not a feasible option given the claimant’s previous interactions and
communications with Mr Coupe and Ms Deakin.
• The claimant's actions and the tone of his communications demonstrated a
total lack of respect towards the UK Senior Management Team, with no
understanding of how his communications made others feeI. They often
carried with them an underlying threat that matters would be escalated if they
were not resolved in the claimant’s favour. That did not create a healthy work
environment.
• Mr Marquard had not been able to identify any signs within the report and the
claimant’s communications that his interactions with the UK Senior
Management Team were likely to change. (We find that this was the basis on
which Mr Marquard had decided that mediation was not a viable alternative
although he did not spell that out in the letter).
627. Mr Marquard’s overall conclusions was that:
“It is important that both sides have to have mutual respect and must not
have to work in fear of threats of discrimination, victimisation and
potential litigation. In reaching my decision, I have also considered your
health and wellbeing and have come to the conclusion that we have reached
the end of the road. I do not consider that there are any means of remedying
the breakdown in the working relationship and it is therefore
irremediable.”
628. Mr Marquard’s letter confirmed the claimant had a right of appeal. Any appeal
had to be made in writing within 5 working days to Ms Johnson who would then appoint
an Appeal Officer.
Events from 24 February 2022 - 13 May 2022 the Appeal against dismissal
629. On 25 February 2022 the claims was signed off work until 25 April 2022
because of “Squamous cell carcinoma of tongue. Autistic spectrum disorder. Anxiety.”
630. On 1 March the claimant’s solicitor wrote to confirm he intended to appeal but
requesting an extension of time to 11 March to do so. Ms Johnson replied the same
day to confirm an extension until noon of that date.
631. On 1 March the respondent sent the claimant its response to the DSAR made
in his solicitor's letter on the 8 February.
The claimant’s grounds of appeal
632. The claimant submitted his appeal on the 8th of March 2022. His grounds for
doing so were that the dismissal was an act of discrimination, victimisation. was too
severe in the circumstances and was based on incorrect assertions and an unfair
procedure. His central point was that the UK senior management team had
demonstrated a fundamental lack of understanding about Autism. The key points
made were that:
124

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• The procedure followed was not fair – the respondent should not have
proceeded with the investigation and dismissal hearing while the claimant was
off sick. Instead, the process should have been suspended until the claimant
was well enough to return to work so he could participate. The failure to do so
indicated the process was a foregone conclusion.
• Ms Jones's finding that the relationship had broken down was a foregone
conclusion given that she was instructed by the UK senior management team
because of their belief it had broken down.
• Ms Jones had no professional experience or knowledge of Autism and so was
not in a position to make the value judgement about the claimant’s Autism and
its impact which were central to her conclusions.
• The extent of to which the claimant’s “directness” and communication had
caused offence and personal resentment had been exaggerated in Ms Jones's
report and had never been raised with the claimant.
• The e-mail of the 3 September 2021 in particular had been sent at a period of
great stress for the claimant which made it more difficult for the claimant to
mask his condition. That was not taken into account.
• The reasons given for the breakdown in the relationship derived from the
claimant’s disability and his having previously raised grievances and brought
Tribunal claims alleging disability discrimination. Neither was a legitimate basis
for dismissal.
• The investigation and dismissal disregarded the recommendations in the
Aspiedent report, specifically to be lenient when the claimant said something
which could be construed as offensive, try to explain everything in a logical way
and give warning and explain the reasons for change.
633. The claimant asserted that the respondent should have:
• Raised any communication issues with him formally as a performance/conduct
issue;
• Explored the possibility of engaging a support worker to review the claimant's
e-mails and work with him on his tone;
• Arranged training on working with autistic individuals for the UK senior
management team;
• Undertaken mediation between the claimant and the UK senior management
team; and
• Waited until Mr Cornwell's replacement as MD was in place to see whether the
issues persisted once Mr Cornwell had left the business.
634. In addition to reinstatement, the outcomes sought were the same as those set
out at (c) to (f) in the solicitor’s letter of 8 February.
125

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
The appeal hearing and outcome
635. Mr d’Huc was appointed to hear the appeal. He had had next to no prior
involvement with the matters in the case. He had provided Ms Fuenfstueck with some
feedback on the response to the claimant’s email of 1 November 2020 agreeing with
her suggestion of sending a short answer and not getting involved in a discussion
about country performance management. He had, at Mr Marquard’s request, provided
information about the relevant roles of the matrix manager and UK line manager in the
context of the 2021 grievance. We accept his evidence that other than that he had not
come across the claimant in the course of carrying out his duties and had never met
him.
636. A virtual appeal hearing by Teams was scheduled for the 23 March 2022. In the
invitation letter dated 16 March 2022 Ms Johnson offered the claimant the same 3
adaptations proposed for the dismissal hearing. The deadline for any written
representations was 21 March. Alternatively, Ms Johnson confirmed the claimant’s
grounds of appeal would be taken as his written representations. The claimant was
warned the hearing might proceed in his absence if he did not respond. The letter also
gave the claimant the option to attend an OH assessment with Dr Rooms to enable
the respondent to better understand any reasonable adjustments it could make to the
appeal process to support the claimant's participation in it. Ms Johnson repeated the
assurance that Dr Rooms was suitably qualified and experienced to conduct such an
assessment. She confirmed that if the claimant chose to attend an OH appointment
the respondent would postpone the appeal meeting by 2-3 weeks until they had the
report from Medigold.
637. The claimant’s solicitors responded on the 16 March to say the claimant was
unable to attend the meeting as proposed because of his health and the need to
consult Ms Dinnes, who was then on leave. The respondent agreed to extend the
deadline for response to 25 March. Ms Dinnes wrote on 25 March (p.991) to confirm
that the claimant was not well enough to attend the appeal hearing and would like the
grounds of appeal and the letter of 8 February to be carefully considered by Mr d’Huc
alongside Ms Jones’s report and Mr Marquard’s outcome letter.
638. On 31 March 2022 Ms Johnson forwarded the Grounds of Appeal to Ms Jones.
She explained that the claimant would not be attending the appeal due to his health.
She asked for Ms Jones’s comments on Grounds 1 to 4, which made reference to her
Investigation Report. Ms Johnson asked for a response by 12 on Monday 4 April
because she was due to meet Mr d’Huc then.
639. Ms Jones provided those comments on 1 April 2022 (pp.995-999). She strongly
refuted the suggestion that the conclusion of the Investigation was a foregone
conclusion. She rejected the claimant’s criticism that she had no professional
experience or knowledge of his Autism and had made a “number of value judgments”
about it. She said the claimant was not informed to make an assessment of her
professional experience or knowledge of Autism. She said she had made conclusions
on behaviours based on her experience and view of what is acceptable behaviour in
the workplace and towards colleagues. Ms Jones also rejected the suggestion that
she had focussed on “negative” emails, ignoring positive interactions and focussing
on emails sent when the claimant was under pressure. She said she had noted positive
126

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
interactions but the majority of the claimant’s communications were negative. Many
were sent when he was not managing serious medical conditions.
640. Ms Jones rejected the assertion that the reason the relationship had broken
down was because of his communication style and the fact he had raised issues with
disability discrimination previously. She pointed out it was not her decision to dismiss
but said there was no evidence to support the claim that the dismissal was because
the claimant had raised issues of disability discrimination. Nor did she accept that the
decision to dismiss was made because of matters arising from the claimant’s disability
such as communication issues. Her view was that any issues that were raised by were
given due consideration and time and that Mr Cornwell, Mr Coupe, and Mr Al-Qasmi
ensured that their approach, responses and information provided were appropriate to
how the claimant would process information. She described their level of commitment
and professionalism in dealing with formal grievances or concerns raised by the
claimant as being of a very high standard. There were times where business decisions
were compromised or delayed as a result. We find that was the case, the 2019 bonus
issue being a prime example.
641. Addressing the steps short of dismissal which the claimant set out in his
Grounds of appeal, Ms Jones said that her understanding was that the respondent
had arranged an OH assessment but the claimant had refused to engage with it, that
mediation was not appropriate given the extent to which the relationship had broken
down and that there was evidence of Mr Cornwell having worked with the claimant to
support him in his communication with others.
642. When it came to the impact of Mr Cornwell’s resignation, Ms Jones said had it
come to light before the report was finalised, she may have considered it as part of
her recommendations. She said it was important to note that the relationship had
broken down with the entire board and UK SLT and careful consideration would need
to be given to how appropriate it would be to give a new MD (with a significant remit
to lead the business) the reporting line for the claimant.
643. We find Mr d’Huc reviewed Ms Jones’s Report, including its appendices and
Ms Jones’s responses to the Grounds of Appeal. He also reviewed the letter from the
claimant’s solicitors of 8 February 2022, Mr Marquard’s hearing outcome letter and the
claimant’s Grounds of Appeal. He also asked Ms Johnson to provide him with
additional emails referred to in the documentation. Mr d’Huc decided to reject the
appeal. He set out his reasons in the outcome letter dated 12 April 2022. We accept
his evidence that the letter accurately set out the reasons for his decision.
644. In summary:
• Mr d’Huc was satisfied there was no evidence that the investigation by Ms
Jones was a foregone conclusion. She had conducted the investigation
professionally and without bias. Mr Marquard gave careful consideration to the
facts set out in Ms Jones’s Report before reaching the decision to dismiss.
• Had the claimant engaged with Ms Jones during the investigation, the claimant
could have sought to question her to ascertain her knowledge and experience
of Autism. In any event Mr d’Huc did not accept this as an argument against the
validity of the report. It was unreasonable to expect that everyone who has to
make decisions in relation to an employee with a disability will have vast
127

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
experience of each and every type of disability. That did not prevent them from
applying their skills, objectivity, critical thinking and sensitivity to a particular set
of circumstances, in order to make a recommendation as in Ms Jones’s Report.
• Mr d’Huc rejected the claimant’s claim that the extent of his directness in
communication had been exaggerated because the investigation was so wide
and general in scope. In his view, Ms Jones had taken the correct approach by
considering whether there was a pattern to the claimant’s communications with
the SMT and determine whether they were reasonable in the circumstances.
That broader view was required to assess whether the relationship had broken
down irretrievably.
• Mr d’Huc then addressed the claimant’s point that no formal process was
instigated and no warning given about the tone of his emails before the 3
September email. No formal process was appropriate. His view was that the
claimant’s conduct could have been called into question based on his email
communications but instead Mr Cornwell had tried to work with him informally
on his communication.
• Mr d’Huc also concluded that it had become an impossible position because
whenever feedback was given which the claimant did not like he would become
threatening or aggressive in tone, e.g. the 2018 and 2019 bonus issues. When
Mr Cornwell had tried to give the claimant feedback on his communication in
the 2020 Development Dialogue, the claimant had refused to sign it. Mr d’Huc
said that demonstrated the claimant did not accept feedback that was meant to
assist him.
• When it came to positive examples not having been shared, the claimant had
not provided any. In any event, even if there were positive examples that did
not alter the fact of the many negative communications he had sent.
• He could find no evidence to support the claim that the decision to dismiss was
based on the claimant having exercised his employment rights.
• The respondent had attempted to arrange an OH appointment on many
occasions. Mr d’Huc found the claimant’s reasons for refusing to do so and the
pre-conditions imposed to be unreasonable. The claimant’s contract entitled the
respondent to nominate a medical practitioner and Medigold had confirmed
their appointed physician was suitably qualified.
• When it came to the suggestion that the respondent should carry out training
for its senior management in Autism, Mr d’Huc pointed out that the claimant had
said in an email that he would not regard any training offered by Aspiedent (the
provider he himself had suggested) as suitable. As a result, Dr Guest’s offer of
training was not taken up. However, the SMT had received equality and
diversity training from a law firm.
• Mr d’Huc rejected the suggestion that the respondent had disregarded the
recommendations made by Aspiedent. He believed they had taken on board
the recommendations and had catered to the claimant’s needs wherever
possible. He noted that there were a number of recommendations made to the
128

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
claimant by Dr Guest. Mr d’Huc said the claimant had not shared any evidence
that he had followed those recommendations.
• With regard to the possibility of employing a support worker to review emails
etc, that was something that could have been discussed via OH or otherwise if
the claimant had chosen to engage. There was, in any event, evidence that the
respondent had made reasonable adjustments, e.g. providing an office with
natural light, limiting the amount of European travel, optional attendance at work
social events, working from home full-time, support and guidance from Mr
Cornwell when engaging with Group colleagues and support from HR and his
matrix manager when transitioning into OneIT.
• Mediation was not appropriate given the extent of relationship breakdown. Mr
d’Huc could not see any examples of where the claimant had engaged
positively with external parties and typically rejected any request to work with
them. He believed the claimant would only have engaged positively with
mediation if his demands were met without compromise on his part.
• Mr d’Huc considered the fact that Mr Cornwell was leaving the business and
that a new MD had been appointed. They were not due to take up their role until
1 July 2022. In the interim period, the claimant would have been required to
report into a member of the UK statutory Board. That meant either Mr Coupe or
Mrs Deakin but the claimant had raised a grievance against Mr Coupe stating
he lacked trust and confidence in him as a manager and had questioned the
professionalism and integrity of Mrs Deakin when she dealt with the 2021
Grievance.
• Mr d’Huc had considered whether the return to work meeting on 8 November
2021 was unfair. He decided it was not, given that the claimant had made it
clear that no further treatment was required and that he did not want a phased
return to work and was ready to take up his duties. There was no reason to
believe at that time that the claimant would not be able to participate fully in the
investigation. He found that the claimant was given every opportunity to
participate in the investigation and subsequent hearing with reasonable
adjustments being made to the process. It was made clear that should he not
attend the hearing on 17 February 2022, it would go ahead in his absence. The
respondent had tried to arrange OH appointment to get advice on the claimant’s
ability to participate. Since the matter started on 8 November 2021, Mr D’Huc’s
view was that it was reasonable to move the process on as the respondent had
done.
• In the “Outcome“ section of his letter, Mr d’Huc said he had taken into account
the amount of time and the number of occasions that the claimant’s
communication with the SMT had been an issue, even with the change to
reporting to Mr Cornwell. He believed the SMT had done everything it could to
make adaptations, reasonable adjustments and offer support. He
acknowledged it was every employee's right to raise a grievance or submit a
complaint to an Employment Tribunal. However, he said “to use these rights as
a threat is not conducive to a healthy working environment for anyone involved.”
129

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• Mr d’Huc stressed that the 3 September 2021 email was “really not my focus”.
Any employee could email the CEO of the Group. When reaching his decision,
he had focussed on the effect that the claimant’s communications had on Mr
Cornwell and other members of the SMT. Mr d’Huc said that the claimant had
caused a great deal of unnecessary stress to those people. He said that
“When a manager feels fearful of providing feedback and as a consequence,
projects are delayed, customers could be let down and the business could
suffer, I find that the needs of the business are being neglected for one
employee and as such the Company cannot sustain this. I also have to
consider the responsibility that the Company has to its other employees and
there has to be a balance of fairness for a company to meet everyone's
needs, which, when one person takes up so much time and energy, is not
possible and the Company suffers.”
645. Mr d’Huc confirmed that his decision was final and there was no further right of
appeal.
646. On 13 May 2022 the claimant filed Tribunal claim 2403516/2022 complaining
of unfair dismissal, discrimination arising from disability, harassment and victimisation.
He had begun early conciliation on 14 March 2022. The ACAS Early Conciliation
Certificate was issued on 25 April 2022.
Dr Ruthenberg’s Report
647. Dr Ruthenberg’s Report was based on 9 hours of interviews with the claimant
over 3 meetings. The last meeting of 2 hours was face to face, the earlier meetings by
Teams. Mrs Turner was present for the second Teams interview. Dr Ruthenberg had
been sent a number of documents including the pleadings for Tribunal claim
2403516/2022, the 2021 Grievance documentation and some of the correspondence
relating to the dismissal and appeal process. He had been sent the Aspiedent Report
and the final version of Ms Jones’s report. Based on the “documents read” list at
Appendix 1 to his Report we find he had not been sent correspondence prior to 2021,
e.g. the exchanges challenging pay bonuses in 2019 and 2020 or the December 2018
Expenses letter to Mr Cornwell. We find he had also not been sent the correspondence
about the attempts to obtain an OH report in 2022 nor the exchange with Mr Cornwell
on 24 September 2022.
648. Dr Ruthenberg found the claimant’s social capacity at face value to be
“deceptively good” (para 8.1). The claimant had learned social skills by observing
others and become competent in “masking” in social circumstances to a significant
extent. That masking was draining and anxiety provoking (para 8.3).
649. The claimant had set ways of engaging with his areas of interest and reached
a threshold for being rigid in terms of the right and wrong way to do a task. Dr
Ruthenberg commented that the claimant would be an extremely difficult worker to
work alongside, especially if a co-worker had an approach however efficient but
different from his (para 8.6).
650. The claimant’s “unwavering insistence on acknowledgement of work well done,
honesty, consistency and fair play were qualities he demanded of himself and both
expected and assumed to be operative in those with whom he deals and to be the
130

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
‘rules’ within the workplace.” Dr Ruthenberg reported that such expectations were not
mere lifelong psychological characteristics or traits, but hard-wired ways of perceiving
and being-in-the-world. Breaches of that code, especially from those in authority,
would result in important existential and personality decompensation, taking the form
of suspicious worry, tension, anxiety, mood lowering and ultimately withdrawal and
deep resentment. Unfairness being perceived, especially in the face of valid work
achievement would be extremely difficult experiences for the claimant to process (para
8.10)
651. Dr Ruthenberg reported that the most striking feature of the claimant’s speaking
style was his over-inclusiveness, his insistence on being highly detailed and precise,
often correcting or extending earlier points made or indeed resorting to post discussion
emails to correct or modify details deriving from discussion (para 9.2).
652. Although initially the claimant assumed the discussion forum was about him (so
that he “talked at” Dr Ruthenberg) he learned quickly and the latter discussions were
conducted in a better two-way fashion. He was never domineering or unable to see a
counter point being made if made in an appropriate fashion (paras 9.2-9.6).
653. Dr Ruthenberg said he found none of the “militaristic” or “power obsessed”
aspects to the claimant’s personality style (a reference we find to the Aspiedent
Report) and that he would be hard pressed to see how such characteristics could be
inferred. In Dr Ruthenberg’s judgment it was clearly the case that the claimant felt his
performance and achievements were not sufficiently acknowledged or appreciated by
Mr Cornwell but never felt this way in relation to Mr Bose. It is the case that “he never
accepted the argument that his not becoming an IT Director was owing to the post not
being available in the UK subsidiary. He was of the view that had he been fully
appreciated such a post may have been actively worked towards by senior
management.” In Dr Ruthenberg’s view “the absence of taking his request seriously,
even if implausible to implement, was experienced by him as being fobbed off and not
appreciated and became rigidly set in his mind-set as prejudice owing to his Autism”.
The claimant could only make sense of that refusal as relating to historic bias and
prejudice deriving from his autistic disability. He felt that the only reasons for his not
securing a pay rise, must have been owing to historic issues with his manager and to
his disability (paras 9.7 and 9.8).
654. Dr Ruthenberg answered a series of questions in section 10 of his report. Of
relevance to the issues we are deciding he said:
• In addition to over-inclusiveness, the established pattern of verbal
communication style in ASD, is the characteristic directness, often bluntness
with little appreciation of how such a style affects the person being addressed.
There is no awareness of the need to package comments in socially acceptable
terms. As a consequence, offence is often taken at the directness of approach,
with the ASD person often surprised that any offence has been taken as none
was intended. In Mr Turner’s case his style is particularly direct, free of any
‘padding’, usually highly detailed and his manner may come across as unduly
self-confident owing to his self-assurance and self-belief within his areas of
expertise in IT (para 10.2)
131

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
• Because written communication is done removed from any face-to-face
contact, it results in expressing points in an even more direct and blunt fashion.
The claimant would have greater freedom to say what he wanted to say and to
say it the way he wanted to say it and in as much detail as he chose to (para
10.3)
• It was blatantly clear that when the claimant received a meaningful and
sufficiently inclusive summary of his position, i.e. a clear exhibition that his point
had been heard and understood, he then listened to criticism or comment from
that foundation (para 10.4(ii)).
• In Autism all stress (e.g. the claimant’s cancer diagnosis) results in the
exaggeration of core symptoms and associated features. Thus someone who
is highly obsessional in nature will become more so (para 10.5)
• It was manifestly clear that the claimant was significantly unwell at the time of
Ms Jones’s investigation and could not have participated in either the
investigation or the dismissal process (10.6).
655. Dr Ruthenberg had been asked to comment on the Aspiedent Report. Although
acknowledging that Dr Guest was clearly conversant with ASD and highly
knowledgeable about the condition, Dr Ruthenberg said he was unsure about the
validity of her “findings” given her lack of clinical qualifications. We think it likely that
referred to Dr Guest’s suggestion that the claimant might have undiagnosed OCD
issues. He found many points relevant and insightful but found others worryingly
phrased as “near facts or truths” about the claimant which viewed as such, would be
severely misleading. He did not specify which. He said many points were “inferential
and unsubstantiated” and found little by way of corroborative clinical details in his
assessment of the claimant.
656. The respondent asked Dr Ruthernberg to clarify whether (given para 8.10), the
claimant’s ability to continue as an employee would ultimately have been untenable
regardless of the transpired events. In his Addendum Report, Dr Ruthernberg said
that any answer to that question was naturally speculative. However,
“despite central 'hardwiring and deep resentment' etc., persons on the ASD
spectrum do arrive at positions where logic dictates that further
litigation/questioning is futile and getting on with the job is required. This can
be seen as an aspect of their black and white highly pragmatic thinking once
a final point has been reached. While equally speculative, this may well have
been the claimant’s ultimate logical reaction. His long service history,
resistance to any change (as presented at length in the report), his knowledge
of the systems and personnel at PH, his standing and seniority in the
Company generally, may well have led him to a final position of just getting
on with his work. Appropriate and informed counselling of his circumstances
and options, would have been helpful if required. Fear of change and of
anything new, is considerable in ASD in general and in the claimant in
particular. Furthermore, the idea of leaving PH under a cloud and then to start
something new, especially at a likely more junior level, would have been
highly implausible to imagine as a voluntary choice”.
132

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
Discussion and Conclusions
657. On the disputed issues the Tribunal determined as follows:
Issue 3 Unfair Dismissal
Did the respondent dismiss the claimant for a potentially fair reason within the
meaning of section 98 Employment Rights Act 1996?
The respondent alleges that the reason for the dismissal was capability and/or
conduct and/or some other substantial reason, namely a breakdown in trust and
in the working relationship between the claimant and senior leaders of the
respondent.
658. Mr Boyd confirmed in his submissions that the sole reason relied on by the
respondent was some other substantial reason, namely a breakdown in trust and in
the working relationship between the claimant and senior leaders of the respondent,
i.e. Mr Cornwell, Mr Coupe, Mrs Deakin and Mr Al-Qasmi. In this part of the judgment
we refer to them collectively as “the UK SLT”.
659. We accept that irretrievable breakdown in relationship is a potentially fair
reason for dismissal.
Issue 4: If yes, did the respondent in fact dismiss the claimant for the potentially
fair reason that it alleges?
660. Ms Dinnes confirmed in her submissions that the claimant’s case was that
there was not an irretrievable breakdown in working relationships between the
claimant and the UK SLT. She submitted that Mr Marquard did not dismiss for a
potentially fair reason because he relied on and was predisposed to accept the
evidence of the UK SLT (and Mr Cornwell in particular). She also submitted there could
not be a potentially fair reason because the reasons for dismissal arose from the
claimant’s disability and/or from his doing protected acts.
661. We have explained elsewhere why we have found that the claimant’s dismissal
did not arise from disability or his protected acts. We deal below (Issue 7) with the
submission that the process carried out was not fair or reasonable.
662. Our central finding on this issue, however, is that the genuine reason Mr
Marquard dismissed the claimant was that he was satisfied on the evidence before
him that the working relationship between the claimant and the UK Senior
Management Team had broken down irretrievably. We find that was a conclusion
which was within the band of reasonableness given the evidence before him at the 17
February 2022 hearing. We accept that the reasons for his decision to dismiss were
those set out in his dismissal letter dated 24 February 2022. That was a potentially fair
reason for dismissal, namely “some other substantial reason justifying dismissal”.
Issue 5: To the extent relevant, did the respondent conduct a reasonable
investigation?
Issue 6: Did the respondent follow a fair procedure?
133

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
663. We deal with these 2 issues together. The respondent accepted this was not a
conduct dismissal, so the Burchell test does not apply. However, based on Coulson
We find that the ACAS Code does apply. We also bear in mind that in determining
what a fair process is, Vestric and Matthews tells us there must be some sensible,
practical and genuine efforts to see whether an improvement can be effected, albeit
that does not mean "all" reasonable steps must be taken by the employer. We accept
that we must not substitute our view as to the appropriate process but must assess
what the respondent did against the band of reasonableness.
664. Ms Dinnes and Mr Boyd both made extensive submissions on this issue. Rather
than set them out in full we will deal with the relevant points raised as they arise.
665. Ms Dinnes submitted that the respondent must have been aware that telling the
claimant about the launch of an investigation at the end of his return-to-work meeting
would be distressing to the claimant. It would have been evident, she submitted, that
he was “mentally fragile” because he was still recovering from cancer. She also
submitted that as an autistic individual, the claimant struggled to cope with surprises
and changes.
666. We can see how telling an employee recovering from cancer on their first day
back that they are going to be subject to an investigation could easily be viewed as
unfeeling or unsympathetic. That is not the test we are required to apply. In this case
the claimant at that meeting told the respondent that he wanted to return to work full-
time, that no adjustments were needed and that he would let the respondent know if
any support was required. In those circumstances we do not think it was beyond the
band of reasonableness for Mr Al-Qasmi to decide it was appropriate to raise the
investigation with the claimant. It seems to us that holding a return to work meeting
giving the impression that it was “business as usual” but later telling the claimant that
the UK SLT’s perspective was that the working relationship had potentially broken
before that meeting would be more of a “change” or “surprise” than being upfront with
him at the first opportunity. If the approach of delaying informing him was taken, the
claimant might understandably feel that the return to work meeting had been at worst
a sham and at best misleading. We do not find it was beyond the band of
reasonableness for the respondent to inform the claimant of the investigation at the
end of his return-to-work meeting on 8 November 2021.
667. We find it was reasonable to instruct an external third-party to investigate
whether the working relationship had broken down. We accept Mr Boyd’s submission
that given the seniority of those involved it was reasonable to conclude that it was not
appropriate for a more junior UK employee to be appointed. Given the issues raised
would be governed by UK Employment Law it was also reasonable to conclude that
appointing a non-UK senior manager would not have been appropriate because they
would have needed an understanding of UK employment law and practices.
Appointing Ms Jones enabled the eventual decision maker to benefit from her advice
about UK Employment Law and practice while providing an outsider’s view on the
working relationship between the claimant and the SMT.
668. We do not accept Ms Dinnes’s submission that it was inevitable that Ms Jones’s
investigation would find what Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi wanted her to find, i.e. that
the working relationship had irretrievably broken down. We found that Mr Cornwell did
not take part in the process of instructing Ms Jones and that Mr Al-Qasmi also stepped
134

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
back from the process as much as was possible within the small UK HR Team. We do
accept, however, that given they both had a role in initiating the investigation, there
was a particular onus on the respondent to ensure that the claimant’s perspective on
the working relationship was taken into account in any investigation and subsequent
decision. That seems to us consistent with the notion of a “fair process”, the approach
set out in Vestric and Matthews and the ACAS Code.
669. Ms Dinnes submitted that the scope of the investigation was skewed. In effect,
her submission was that what started as an investigation into an email on 3 September
spiralled into an exercise to “dig dirt” on the claimant going back years. We do not
accept that the temporal scope of the investigation was unfair or unreasonable. We
accept that in order to assess whether the working relationship had broken down, Ms
Jones and the ultimate decision maker needed a context for the 3 September email
rather than judging matters solely by that email taken in isolation.
670. We do not accept the suggestion that the investigation was an exercise in
“digging dirt” on the claimant to ensure he was presented in the worst possible light,
thereby enabling a conclusion that the working relationship had broken down. Mr
Cornwell in his interview with Ms Jones referred to the claimant as “delightful” and a
“clear expert in his field”. We find he and Mr Al-Qasmi were throughout genuinely
concerned to ensure a fair process was followed, e.g. by engaging a third party to
investigate to obtain an objective assessment of the state of the working relationship.
671. We do accept that the initial evidence to Ms Jones’s investigation came in large
part from the UK SLT perspective. That was clearly the case for the interview evidence.
It was also case for the majority of the documentary examples with which she was
provided via Ms Johnson. There were some documents from the claimant’s point of
view such as the claimant’s 2018 Tribunal claim and 2021 Grievance and Grievance
Appeal documents. However, we accept that what those documents did do was to
focus on the “flashpoints” or occasions when there had been conflict between the
claimant and members of the UK SLT. That was understandable, because those
flashpoints had, from the UK SLT’s perspective, contributed to the breakdown in the
working relationship. The risk that posed, however, was that the investigation ended
up focussing on those flashpoints and not seeing them in the context of the “better
times” when the working relationship was good or, at least, functioning.
672. It was part of the claimant’s case that the picture presented to Ms Jones was
skewed and too negative. We considered whether the approach taken by the
respondent was within the band of reasonableness. Should, for example, Ms Jones
have carried out an analysis of all exchanges between the claimant and the UK SLT
over a set period of time to ensure any flashpoints were seen in context? The Bundle
included a document where the claimant had carried out such an analysis of messages
sent by him between 1 January 2021 and 30 June 2021 (“the Message Analysis
Summary”). That was not provided to Ms Jones as part of the investigation nor
submitted to Mr Marquard or Mr d’Huc.
673. It seems to us that the Message Analysis Summary illustrates the difficulties
which such an approach involved. First, the outcome of any such analysis depended
on the period selected for analysis. To take an obvious example, confining the analysis
of messages to the first 6 months of 2021 rather than all of 2021 excluded the
claimant’s formal grievance, the 3 September 2021 email and the emails of 24-30
135

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
September 2021 which significantly altered the picture of the working relationship.
Second, the task of analysing the messages was significant. The Message Analysis
Summary covered a period of 6 months. During that period the claimant sent 993
messages to UK and international colleagues of which 56 were identified as being sent
to the UK SLT. Each of those was analysed in the Message Analysis Summary by
tone and allocated to a category. Even accepting that the initial “sift” of messages to
identify recipients could be done relatively quickly by automated means, the analysis
of the “tone” of emails between the claimant and UK SLT would have been time
consuming, particularly if a longer period was selected for analysis. Third, analysis of
“tone” is necessarily subjective, depending on the parameters applied and the
subjective view of the person carrying out the analysis. It was not, ultimately,
something that could be subject of a purely objective statistical analysis. Finally, and
most significantly it seems to us, that approach would not answer the questions which
the investigation was seeking to address, namely whether the working relationship had
broken down irretrievably at the point when the investigation was taking place. That
was not a numbers game depending on what percentage of emails were categorised
as “warm” or “concerned” as the Message Analysis Summary did. We do not find that
the investigation was flawed because that kind of analysis was not carried out.
However, in the absence of that kind of analysis it was all the more important to take
reasonable steps to ensure that the investigation took into account the claimant’s
perspective, the evidence he wanted to provide and did not merely focus on the
incidents of conflict between the claimant and the UK SLT.
674. We accept that the respondent did take steps to try and obtain the claimant’s
input. He was invited to meet with Ms Jones or to provide written input before the draft
report was finalised (pp.816-817). When the claimant indicated that he was not well
enough to take part in the investigation the respondent then took steps to obtain an
Occupational Health report to clarify whether and when the claimant would be well
enough to take part in the investigation and how.
675. We find the respondent took reasonable steps to allay the claimant’s concerns
about the relevant experience and qualifications of the OH adviser. Ms Johnson
confirmed Dr Rooms’s experience and explained why the specific advice he was being
asked to give did not require him to be an Autism or cancer specialist. We do not
accept that it was unreasonable for the respondent to decide that the claimant’s
requirements for an OH specialist were too prescriptive. It had past experience of
attempts to obtain OH advice being inordinately delayed by the claimant insisting on
an OH adviser who met his criteria. It had to balance the need to deal with matters
promptly and without unreasonable delay against the need to give the claimant an
opportunity to put his case. Both of those are identified as elements of fairness in the
ACAS Code (para 4).
676. The claimant was then sent Ms Jones’s draft report and given an opportunity to
provide his input. We find the timescale for his comments (22 December to 3 January)
was relatively short. An extension was given for a response. However, that itself was
relatively short, extending the deadline by 4 days to 7 January 2022. The original
period was over the Christmas and New Year period and the respondent was on notice
that the claimant was unwell by reason of his GP’s letter and fit note.
677. The claimant was able to respond to a limited extent via his wife’s letter dated
31 December 2022 but that itself referred to his inability to respond with “full and fair
136

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
representation”. We find that Ms Jones did take into account the limited points made
in that letter in preparing her final report. it seems to us that the letter Ms Johnson sent
the claimant on 13 January 2022 (pp.892-893) acknowledged that the claimant had
not provided his substantive feedback or comments on that report. We find that made
it important that the claimant was given every opportunity to provide his input at the
next stage of the process. That was due to be the meeting with Mr Marquard on 26
January 2022.
678. The claimant was invited to that meeting by a letter dated 13 January 2022. At
this point, the primary means of communication between the claimant and the
respondent was post rather than email. Even taking that into account, the claimant
was being given around 10 days’ notice of the hearing. The hearing was postponed
on 25 January due to the bereavement suffered by the claimant and his family. The
postponement was until 17 February 2022, i.e. around 21 days. The deadline for
providing a written response was extended from noon on 15 February 2022 to 10 a.m.
on 16 February 2022.
679. We do not find that the claimant acted unreasonably in deciding that it would
need to proceed with the process without waiting for an OH report given the obstacles
the claimant put in the way of obtaining one. We also think that the steps it took to
involve the claimant were reasonable. It sought to involve him at the pre-draft, draft
and final hearing stages. However, we do find the timescale it imposed on the claimant
was not within the band of reasonableness. That applies, in particular, to the time given
to the claimant to respond to the draft report and the length of postponement of the
meeting with Mr Marquard.
680. We do not suggest that the claimant’s absence on sick leave and the family
bereavement meant the process should have been subject to a prolonged delay. It
was not unreasonable to decide to proceed while the claimant was on sick leave,
particularly when, as Mr Boyd submitted, he had placed obstacles in the way of
obtaining an OH report on his ability to participate. We accept there was a need to
deal with matters without unreasonable delay as referred to in the ACAS Code. We
accept that given the claimant’s seniority there was a need for the situation to be
resolved and that there was a demand from the Group to know whether the claimant
was going to be involved in proposed future projects (p.881). However, we accept Ms
Dinnes’s submission that the respondent did not provide a clear explanation of the
need for the degree of urgency exhibited in the process.
681. We find the decision not to postpone the “dismissal hearing” for a longer period
was not within the band of reasonableness. A longer period would have given time for
Medigold to provide the information about Dr Rooms‘s qualifications and experience
received on 17 February 2022, for the respondent to share that with the claimant and
given him an opportunity to confirm whether he would attend the OH appointment. It
would also have given the claimant and his representatives more time to prepare their
written representations for that hearing. We accept an employee should not be entitled
to dictate the process and its timeline. However, given our findings about the
importance of giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity to participate in the
process, we find the timescale imposed was outside the band of reasonableness and
the process unfair as a result.
137

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
682. As to the hearing itself, we do not accept Ms Dinnes’s submission that Mr
Marquard’s approach on the 17 February 2022 and in reaching his decision indicated
that he was predisposed against the claimant. We accept that he took time to consider
the documentation he was presented with both at the meeting and afterwards. He
raised points potentially in the claimant’s favour, e.g. the question of the impact of Mr
Cornwell leaving and the appointment of a new MD. However, given that Mr Marquard
was aware of the circumstances behind the claimant’s non-attendance (having been
involved in the decision to postpone) we do think he should have been particularly
alive to the need to challenge Ms Jones’s conclusions and recommendations in the
absence of the claimant being able to do so himself.
683. That was particularly important, we find, because Ms Jones’s report was in
places couched in terms of final conclusions rather than recommendations, e.g. para
35 said that Mr Cornwell’s “grievance is upheld”. It was also apparent on the face of
the report that there was a lack of evidence from the claimant’s perspective. Para 36
said that unless there was “substantial evidence to counter what had been shared and
impact my conclusions” Ms Jones could not see how the relationship could be
repaired. We find the report placed the burden on the claimant to disprove the
provisional conclusion and required him to provide “substantial evidence” to do so.
684. We accept that it was reasonable for Mr Marquard to rely on Ms Jones in some
respects. She had expertise in relevant employment law and practice in the UK which
Mr Marquard did not. We also accept her evidence that she did have an understanding
of Autism and had worked with colleagues who had Autism. The claimant asserted
she did not have the requisite knowledge. We find (based on his approach to the OH
issue) that the claimant had a fixed view that only someone with a high degree of
specialism could understand his way of thinking and the impact of Autism on his
behaviour. We find it was within the band of reasonableness for the respondent to
conclude that Ms Jones had sufficient knowledge of Autism to carry out the
investigation.
685. However, we do find that Mr Marquard should have challenged Ms Jones more
than he did. Although Ms Jones did accurately report positive evidence about the
claimant (e.g. para 16) we find her report did not set out the “long view”, putting the
incidents of discord in the context of the overall working relationship. It did not directly
address whether the 3 September 2021 should be viewed as a “blip” in an otherwise
retrievable relationship or a ”last straw” which rendered it irretrievable. We find that a
reasonable employer would have asked what evidence Ms Jones had seen which
might be “counter what had been shared”, rather than putting the onus on the (absent)
claimant. It would have been reasonable, for example, to ask Ms Jones to provide an
overall perspective of the relationship over time so that Mr Marquard could judge
whether the incidents in the report had rendered the breakdown in the relationship
“irretrievable”.
686. We considered whether the unfairness in the process was remedied by the
appeal process. Mr d’Huc did have further information from the claimant and written
comments from Ms Jones on the claimant’s grounds of appeal. However, one of the
reasons for his decision was, according to his outcome letter, the lack of positive
evidence from the claimant. Mr d’Huc was aware of the reason the claimant was not
in attendance. It seems to us that in a breakdown of relationship case, a fair process
would require Mr d’Huc (like Mr Marquard) to be careful to establish what evidence the
138

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
claimant would have put forward to challenge Ms Jones’s conclusions. However, Ms
Jones did not attend the appeal hearing nor did Mr d’Huc ask her any written
questions. He did not take the opportunity to interrogate Ms Jones’s findings
particularly when it came to the long-term view. We find a reasonable employer would
have done so. We find the appeal did not remedy the issues we have identified when
it came to the original decision to dismiss.
687. When it comes to this issue, therefore, our finding is that the respondent did not
carry out a fair process by failing to allow further time for the claimant to be involved
in the hearing with Mr Marquard and by his not sufficiently interrogating Ms Jones’s
conclusions at that hearing.
688. For those reasons, the unfair dismissal complaint succeeds.
Issue 7: If the respondent dismissed for a potentially fair reason, did the
respondent act reasonably in all the circumstances in dismissing the claimant
pursuant to section 98(4) ERA 1996?
689. We have found the dismissal was unfair because of the flaws in the process
followed. If we are wrong about that, we would have found the dismissal was fair. Our
central finding is that Mr Marquard’s decision that the relationship between the
claimant and the UK SLT had broken down irretrievably was within the band of
reasonableness. We acknowledge that there was evidence of periods where the
relationship was functioning even after “flashpoints” such as the 2018 Expenses
Incident or the OneIT transition. However, we find that, to adopt Mr Boyd’s phrase in
his submissions, the foundations of the relationship had eroded away because of the
claimant’s “bloody mindedness” (to use the shorthand adopted at the Hearing - see
para 726). The relationship was a ticking time bomb which exploded when the claimant
sent his 3 September 2021 email during the ongoing grievance appeal process.
690. For the claimant, Ms Dinnes submitted that there were 4 bases on which the
decision to dismiss was beyond the band of reasonableness. They were: the lack of a
fair warning; the failure to consider alternatives (primarily mediation); the impact of Mr
Cornwell’s departure and reduced contact with the UK SLT; and the claimant being
“blamed for disability”. We deal with each in turn.
The lack of a fair warning
691. For the claimant, Ms Dinnes submitted that a reasonable employer would not
have dismissed the claimant in circumstances where he had not been given a fair
warning that he may be dismissed because of his communication style. She submitted
there had been no such fair warning in this case. There had been ad hoc conversations
where Mr Cornwell had expressed his frustration with the claimant, but no objectives
or additional support were discussed. She submitted that it was agreed between the
parties that the claimant was not warned in writing or otherwise that his communication
was a serious problem and could lead to dismissal. Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi had
not communicated to the claimant that his communication had been threatening,
aggressive or overly litigious. The claimant could not have known that the UK SLT felt
there was a serious problem in the way he communicated or dealt with them. Had he
known, he would have sought professional support in relation to any sensitive
communications with the UK SLT.
139

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
692. Mr Boyd submitted that as this case was about breakdown in relationships it
was artificial to expect “warnings” in the way one might expected in the context of a
conduct case. We did not understand Ms Dinnes to be suggesting that a formal
warning of that kind should have been issued. We accept Mr Boyd’s submission hat
this was not a conduct case.
693. Ms Dinnes submitted that Mr Al-Qasmi accepted in cross examination that the
claimant only discovered there were relationship issues in 2021 when he was told that
an external investigator had been engaged. Mr Boyd in his rebuttal submissions
suggested this was an incorrect representation of what Mr Al-Qasmi’s evidence. We
prefer Mr Boyd’s submission on this issue. We find Mr Al-Qasmi pointed out in his
cross-examination evidence that he had told the claimant in the context of the 2019
DSAR issue that he was unhappy about meeting the claimant face to face because of
the allegations the claimant had made in an email about him (p.363).
694. Mr Boyd submitted that the claimant would have been well aware of the
concerns about his communications from his interactions with Mr Cornwell and other
members of the UK SLT. The claimant’s document at p.381, for example, referred to
his being aware in 2019 about concerns that the working relationship had broken
down.
695. We prefer Mr Boyd’s submissions. We find the claimant was well aware that
there were issues between him and the UK SLT (and Mr Cornwell in particular). His
email to Ms Fuenfstueck explicitly said that Mr Cornwell had “a problem” with the
claimant. Mr Cornwell had been specific about the issue when discussing the 2017
bonus, referring to the claimant’s “constant pushback” being “tiresome” (something the
claimant had strongly objected to at the time). Mr Cornwell made a similar comment
in writing in January 2019 in response to the December expenses issue, saying he
was finding the “constant challenge and lengthy push back from you on matters related
to what is basic business process difficult to manage”. The claimant similarly objected
to Mr Cornwell’s remark that he was tired of everything being about the claimant, made
in April 2019. Mr Cornwell made similar comments in writing to the claimant in his
email of 20 September 2019 (p.406-407), referring to the
“kick back” when he challenged the claimant and the impact of that on Mr Cornwell. It
seems to us the issue was not the claimant being unaware of the issues with the UK
SLT but in any willingness on his part to accept that issues were in any way down to
him rather than discrimination or victimisation on the part of the UK SLT.
The failure to consider alternatives (primarily mediation)
696. Ms Dinnes submitted that that the respondent failed to explore the alternatives
to dismissal before dismissing the claimant. No reasonable employer, she submitted,
would have dismissed the claimant without having attempted mediation and
providing professional support for both the claimant and the UK SLT aimed at
managing the claimant’s Autism better in the workplace. She said that the claimant
sent several emails suggesting mediation (pp.772-773, 776). Ms Jones had
dismissed the suggestion of mediation in her report because the claimant did not
have the right mindset for it and Mr Marquard’s letter made no specific reference to
mediation.
140

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
697. Mr Boyd submitted that mediation is a two-way street. It might be the case
that when the claimant felt that his employment was in jeopardy, he embraced the
notion of mediation. However, the damage had been done by that stage. Mediation
could not repair relationships with the UK SLT because they were irremediably
broken down. He submitted it was within a range of reasonable conclusions for Ms
Jones to conclude (as she did at para 36 of her Report) that mediation would not
work. The claimant’s solicitors’ letter of 8 February 2022 (pp.928-934) made no
reference to the possibility of mediation.
698. We prefer Mr Boyd’s submissions. We accept the claimant did refer to
mediation in his email to Mr Al-Qasmi on 8 November 2021 (p.773). His later email of
the same day (p.772) refers to ACAS conciliation rather than mediation. On 9
November he referred to being open to “discussion and mediation”
699. As Ms Jones noted at para 41.d of her report, the claimant’s commitment to
mediation had to be viewed in context. That context was his email of 3 September
2021 in which he said that Mr Cornwell “has a problem with me” and in which he
accused Mr Al-Qasmi of not having the capability to resolve matters. We find that
hard to square with the claimant’s suggestion in his email at p.772 that his challenge
“was to actions rather than a personal view of Mr Cornwell and his capacity to modify
his approach”. We also accept Mr Boyd’s submission that by the time of the
dismissal decision the claimant’s stance had changed. His solicitors’ letter of 8
February 2022 makes no reference to mediation, instead requesting (amongst other
things) an apology for the impact of the investigation process, training for the UK SLT
in working with individuals with Autism and an internal investigation into the
“disproportionate and harmful reaction to the 3 September 2021” email.
700. At the dismissal hearing, when answering questions from Mr Marquard, Ms
Jones expressed the view that mediation did not appear to be possibility because
both parties had to be open to it for it to be beneficial. Her view, based on the
information she had seen was that the claimant had shown distrust of the UK SLT
and was not in a positive frame of mind in relation to them.
701. We find Mr Marquard accepted that conclusion. Although he did not
specifically refer to “mediation” in his outcome letter he said that he had not been
able to identify any signs within the report and the claimant’s communications that
his interactions with the UK SLT were likely to change. We find that was a conclusion
which was within the band of reasonableness as was the resulting conclusion that
mediation was not an appropriate alternative to dismissal in this case. We accept
there had been periods when there had been an absence of conflict with the UK
SLT. We find they did not reflect a change in the claimant’s behaviour towards the
UK SLT. Instead, they coincided with periods when the claimant was not seeking a
pay rise or not being subjected to challenge. Ms Dinnes submitted that the conflicts
were historical, but we find the allegations in the 2021 grievance, the criticisms in the
3 September email and the dig at Mr Coupe in the car repair email exchange in
November 2021 show they were present and never far from the surface in 2021.
702. Mr d'Huc in his decision letter rejecting the claimant’s appeal said that
mediation was not appropriate given the extent of relationship breakdown. He said
he could not see any examples of where the claimant had engaged positively with
external parties and typically rejected any request to work with them. Mr d’Huc also
141

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
believed the claimant would only have engaged positively with mediation if his
demands were met without compromise on his part. We find that conclusion was
consistent with the evidence in Ms Jones’s Report and well within the band of
reasonableness.
703. Ms Dinnes also submitted that the respondent erred by not considering other
alternatives, including the appointment of a support worker to review his emails. That
was something which the claimant raised via his solicitors in their letter of 8 February
2022 (p.934) and in his grounds of appeal. Mr d’Huc dealt with it in his appeal
outcome letter. His view was that had the claimant could have raised and discussed
that at the OH assessment. He also noted the evidence in Ms Jones’s report that Mr
Cornwell had already provided support and guidance when engaging with Group
colleagues and via Mr Al-Qasmi and Mr Bose when transitioning to OneIT. We find it
reasonable for him to conclude that such steps had already been taken but had not
prevented the breakdown in relationship and were unlikely to remedy it for the future.
The impact of Mr Cornwell’s departure and reduced contact with the UK SLT
704. For the claimant, Ms Dinnes submitted that Mr Cornwell’s resignation changed
the landscape significantly. It was Mr Cornwell’s grievance which started the
investigation process, and the vast majority of communications which formed the basis
of Ms Jones's report involved him. No reasonable employer would have proceeded
with dismissal in these circumstances. She also addressed the suggestions that
dismissal was still appropriate because the claimant’s relationship with the rest of the
UK SLT had irretrievably broken down and that dealing with the claimant would
hamper the new Managing Director. She submitted they did not stand up to scrutiny.
She accepted that the claimant’s legal manager had to be a member of the UK SLT,
but his contact with the UK SLT was limited to HR issues.
705. She submitted that the claimant had dealt with Mr Coupe and Mrs Deakin in
relation to very sensitive issues and in extremely stressful circumstances and that
“resolutions had been reached”. She referred to pp.610-616 and 791-793. We do not
find those pages reflect “resolutions having been reached”. On page 610-616 the
claimant relayed his disappointment with Mrs Deakin’s handling of his grievance. He
subsequently appealed against her decision, accusing her of bias and a conflict of
interest. Pages 791-793 related to the Tax Code incident. There was no “resolution”
to that except in the sense that the exchanges ended.
706. Ms Dinnes noted that Mrs Deakin and Mr Coupe’s cross examination evidence
was that issues would inevitably have arisen relating to pay and bonus reviews before
the new Managing Director was due to start in July 2022. Ms Dinnes submitted there
had never been issues raised by the claimant about annual pay reviews and that no
issues about pay and bonus had been raised in 2021 about “standard matters”
between January and June 2021. She submitted that with professional support for the
claimant with sensitive communications, and training for the UK SLT on managing
individuals with Autism there was no good reason why the claimant could not have
dealt with Mrs Deakin and Mr Coupe on HR matters for a few months until the new
Managing Director began work. She submitted it was striking how little effort was put
into exploring this possibility and invited us to conclude that dismissing the claimant in
those circumstances fell outside the band of reasonable responses.
142

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
707. For the respondent, Mr Boyd submitted that the decision to dismiss was within
the band of reasonable responses given that the claimant would need to deal with
either Mr Coupe or Mrs Deakin for a 2-month period. He also submitted that it was
tolerably clear from the evidence that not being appointed to an IT Director role and
the lack of a pay increase in mid-2021 was to use the claimant’s phraseology,
“catastrophic”. He submitted that in April 2022, at the time of his next pay review,
whether the decision maker was Mr Coupe or Mrs Deakin, any failure to provide the
claimant with what he believed he was entitled to would have led to further complaint
and in all likelihood to further litigation. Any future Managing Director would have faced
the same sort of problem and risked “being tarred with the same discriminatory brush”.
A workable relationship was no longer possible.
708. Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss took into account this issue. His view (set
out in his outcome letter) was that the claimant would still need to engage positively
with the UK SLT in future. He also decided it was not reasonable to expect a new MD
to "have to focus on resolving historical issues". We find he considered whether the
claimant could report into someone outside the UK SLT but decided that was not an
option because all country IT employees had legally to report to their country's
management structure. Even with Mr Cornwell's departure that was not a feasible
option given the claimant's previous interactions and communications with Mr Coupe
and Ms Deakin.
709. We find that was a conclusion he was entitled to reach on the evidence and one
within the band of reasonable responses. As we have said, we did not accept Ms
Dinnes’s suggestion that issues between the claimant and Mr Coupe and Mrs Deakin
had been “resolved” or were “historical”. The claimant had in the past expressed his
deep lack of confidence and lack of trust in Mr Coupe. There was nothing to suggest
that had changed. He had accused Mrs Deakin of bias in the grievance appeal process
which had only concluded in September 2021. We do not accept Ms Dinnes’s
submission that there were no pay issues in 2021. That is what the 2021 grievance
was about. It was also the case, we find, that the claimant had challenged his past pay
rises (e.g. the 2020 pay rise) and that he felt strongly that he was underpaid and that
the explanation or that could only be discrimination or victimisation. We find it was also
within the band of reasonableness for Mr Marquard to conclude that any new
Managing Director would have to focus on resolving historical issues, including the
2021 pay review issue and the claimant’s broken relationship with the UK SLT.
710. We also accept Mr Boyd’s submission that history supported the view that the
introduction of a new line manager for the claimant would not resolve the issues with
the working relationship. Contrary to what the claimant had told Ms Fuenfstueck in his
3 September email, he had had issues with managers before Mr Cornwell. The most
obvious example was Mr Coupe but the claimant had also had issues with Mr Heinzel,
Mr Cornwell’s predecessor.
711. Taking all those matters into account, we find that the decision not to wait for
the new MD to start before deciding whether to dismiss was within the band of
reasonable responses.
712. We find the same applies to Mr d’Huc’s decision to refuse the claimant’s
appeal on this issue. It was within the band of reasonableness for him to conclude
that the claimant could not report to Mr Coupe or Mrs Deakin pending the
143

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
appointment of the new MD given that the claimant had raised a grievance against
Mr Coupe stating he lacked trust and confidence in him as a manager and had also
questioned the professionalism of Mrs Deakin.
The claimant being “blamed for disability”.
713. Ms Dinnes submitted that a further material factor in the claimant’s dismissal
was the unfair characterisation of the symptoms of Autism, and that no reasonable
employer would have dismissed for these reasons. She submitted that it was clear
from the dismissal documentation (including Ms Jones’s Report) that the impact of the
claimant’s ASD on his communication style and tendency to challenge decision was
not appreciated when the decision to dismiss was made.
714. In particular she submitted that Ms Jones’s Report, Mr Marquard’s dismissal
decision and Mr d’Huc’s appeal rejection letter suggested there was an element of
choice and therefore blameworthiness in respect of the claimant’s communication
style. That, Ms Dinnes submitted, showed a fundamental misunderstanding or an
intentional mischaracterisation of the way in which ASD impacted on the claimant and
led to him perceived as a trouble maker and someone who was simply being bloody-
minded. He was understood by the UK SLT, and then by Mr Marquard and Mr d’Huc,
as a problem rather than as an asset to the respondent. She invited us to conclude
that that contributed decisively to the decision to dismiss. She submitted that no
reasonable employer would rely on inaccurate and unfair statements about an
employee's disability in their decision to dismiss, especially given the many attempts
the claimant had made to explain his disability both during his employment and during
the investigation/dismissal process.
715. As we have explained in relation to issue 10.4 we did not accept that the
claimant’s dismissal was something arising in consequence of his disability. We find
that Mr Marquard (and Ms Jones’s) conclusion that the behaviour which caused the
breakdown of his relationship with the UK SLT (his “bloody mindedness”) was not due
to his disability is one which fell within the band of reasonableness. They had to decide
on the evidence and information before them. That did not include Dr Ruthenberg’s
report which was created later. It did include the Aspiedent Report, though Mr
Marquard treated that with caution because of the claimant’s concerns about it. We
find that it was reasonable for Mr Marquard to rely on Ms Jones’s knowledge and
experience. We do not find it outside the band of reasonableness to decide that it was
not necessary to appoint a specialist in Autism. Apart from anything else, the
Aspiedent experience had shown the difficulty of obtaining such “expert evidence”
which the claimant would accept as applicable to him.
716. We do not accept that the claimant’s disability was not taken into account. It is
clear from Ms Jones’s Report and Mr Marquard’s decision that there was a recognition
of the claimant’s disability and of steps taken to accommodate that, e.g. working from
home, Mr Cornwell assisting him with communications and UK SLT adapting their
approach by, e.g. communicating by email. We find it was not a case of the claimant
being “blamed for being disabled” as Ms Dinnes submitted, but the respondent making
a decision that his “bloody mindedness” did not arise from his disability. We find that
conclusion was within the band of reasonableness.
Conclusion on Issue 7
144

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
717. We find that the decision that dismissal was the appropriate sanction was one
within the band of reasonableness.
Discrimination arising from disability (s.15 Equality Act 2010)
Issue 8: What were the matters “arising in consequence of [his] disability” on
which the claimant relies? The claimant alleges that:
8.1 The claimant’s manner of communication can be very direct and
detailed, and he finds it more difficult to pick up on social cues.
These consequences of his autism were exacerbated by his
cancer diagnosis, which has placed the claimant under
considerable mental strain;
8.2 The claimant has made complaints about being discriminated
against on the grounds of his disability; and
8.3 The claimant’s autism, cancer diagnosis and cancer treatment
combined made him particularly vulnerable in terms of his
mental health, to the extent that he was more likely to be
signed off work when put under stress.
Issue 9: In relation to each of these:
9.1 Has that been proved by the claimant?
9.2 Does it fall within the statutory provisions.
718. The claimant is an autistic person. There is, it seems to us, a considerable
difficulty in seeking to separate out those aspects of his personality and behaviours
which “arise from” his Autism and those which do not. However, we have to decide the
case that is in front of us. The claimant has specifically defined the “somethings
arising” in consequence of his Autism. As the claimant himself acknowledged in his
cross-examination evidence, other aspects of an autistic person's personality may not
be linked to or arise from Autism. Not all aspects of the claimant’s behaviour are relied
on as something arising from his disability. Acknowledging the degree of artificiality
that that gives rise to, we must make our decision based on the pleaded case.
719. During the hearing, by way of a shorthand, the Tribunal used the term “bloody
mindedness” to refer to those behaviours which did not arise from the claimant’s his
Autism. We accept it may not be the most elegant phrase but was an useful shorthand
in framing questions during oral evidence. However, we have been careful that in
reaching our decision we have done so by reference to the relevant law, the case as
pleaded and the parties’ submissions, not by reference to that shorthand. In deciding
the s.15 Equality Act 2010 complaint the primary question we had to answer was
whether the particular manifestation of the claimant’s Autism pleaded as “something
arising” was an effective case of the alleged unfavourable treatment of him by the
respondent.
720. We deal with each of the 3 pleaded “somethings arising” in turn.
145

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
8.1 - Manner of communication.
721. Ms Dinnes submitted that the evidence that at the hearing and Dr Ruthenberg’s
Report supported findings that the claimant’s manner of communication was “highly
detailed and precise”, could at times be “particularly direct” and involved him being
“unable to pick up on social cues”. She relied on paras 9.2, 9.9-9.10. 10.2(i) and 10.2(ii)
of Dr Ruthenberg’s Report.
722. In his submissions, Mr Boyd drew a distinction between aspects of the
claimant’s manner of communication which the evidence suggested arose from his
Autism (“over-inclusiveness” and “direct, occasionally blunt”) and those which did not
(“aggressive, confrontational or threatening”). He pointed out that Dr Ruthenberg’s
reference to the claimant’s over-inclusiveness at para 9.2 related to the claimant’s
speaking, rather than written, style. He also pointed out that it appeared that it was the
claimant himself, rather than Dr Ruthenberg who identified a “direct, occasionally blunt
style of communication” at para 9.10.
723. We accept Ms Dinnes’s submission that the claimant’s manner of
communication (including in writing) could be detailed and “over-inclusive”. The
respondent’s UK SLT did not dispute that. There were numerous examples of that in
the Bundle (e.g. his response to the 2017 Bonus at p.194-195 or his letter to Mr
Cornwell regarding the December 2018 Expense at pp.324-326). We do not find
anything in Dr Ruthenberg’s Report, read as a whole, which suggests his comments
at 9.2 would not also apply to written communications.
724. We also accept that the claimant’s communications could be direct and “blunt”
in the sense of lacking the usual “social niceties” or “padding” (e.g. his email to Mr
Cornwell after the 17 September 2019 meeting (p.413)). We find that directness and
a difficulty in picking up on social queues were characteristics of the claimant’s manner
of communication. We find, however, that although not intuitively able to pick up on
social queues, he had learned some rules of social etiquette in the sense of being able
to understand what was expected in certain circumstances, e.g. his email to Mrs
Deakin congratulating her on her appointment as a statutory director in January 2021
(p.484).
725. Based on Dr Ruthenberg’s Report (specifically paras 9.2, 9.9-9.10 and 10.2)
we do find that those characteristics of the claimant’s manner of communication were
something arising from a consequence of his disability of Autism. We also find they
were exacerbated at times of stress. We also accept that his cancer diagnosis and
treatment was one such time of stress.
726. Given the way the parties put their respective cases, it is important we clarify
what we mean and don’t mean by “detailed”, “direct” and “difficulty in picking up social
cues”. The respondent’s case is that that the behaviour which led to the irrevocable
breakdown in the claimant’s relationship with the SMT was not his direct or over-
inclusive manner of communication. Instead, it was what it describes as his tendency
to be aggressive in communications, to assertively challenge everything, to seek to
derogate or to do down colleagues and not accept any feedback or challenge. It says
those characteristics (to which for consistency with the Hearing we will apply the
shorthand “bloody mindedness”) were not pleaded as being something arising from
the claimant’s Autism. Neither, it says, was the claimant's tendency to challenge any
decisions adverse to him part of his “manner of communication”.
146

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
727. The claimant did not seek to argue that any tendency to be “aggressive” was
something arising from his disability. His case is that he was not aggressive. We do
not understand the “something arising” pleaded at 8.1 to include a tendency to
challenge any decision adverse to the claimant as part of his “manner of
communication”. If it was, we do not find it supported by Dr Ruthenberg’s report. To
the contrary, his para 10(4)(ii) indicated that the claimant was able to listen to criticism
or comment. We do not find the claimant’s “bloody mindedness” to be something
arising in consequence of his disability.
728. We also do not understand the claimant’s case to be that his lack of
understanding of organisational hierarchy to be part of his “manner of communication”
so that, e.g. he did not understand the ramifications of his writing to Ms Fuenfstueck
on 3 September. If it was, we would have found it contradicted by the evidence.
Although the claimant gave evidence that he does not see hierarchies in the same
way as other people due to being an autistic person, that was contradicted by his letter
to Ms Fuenfstueck on 14 April 2019 (p.366). In that letter he explicitly said that “even
with my condition I know it is not conventional to write to you in this way, and I have
considered it very carefully.”
729. We also do not understand 8.1 to include a tendency to derogate or have a
“dig” at colleagues as we found, for example, that the claimant did in his “car repair”
email exchange with Mr Coupe in November 2021. If it was, we find there was nothing
in Dr Ruthenberg’s Report which suggested that tendency was something arising from
his Autism. The report instead suggested that it was a characteristic of the claimant’s
communication style to avoid “padding” which would seem to us to include such
passing digs and asides.
730. In summary, our finding is that the claimant’s “manner of communication” in the
sense of his direct, overinclusive and detailed writing style was something which arose
from his Autism and was exacerbated by his cancer diagnosis. We find the other
behaviours identified by the respondent at para 713 were not.
8.2 The claimant has made complaints about being discriminated against on the
grounds of his disability
731. It was not disputed that the claimant had made complaints of being
discriminated against on the grounds of his disability. In the claimant’s submissions,
Ms Dinnes submitted that the Tribunal should “conclude that this was a matter which
was closely connected to the claimant's ASD”. She also relied on para 8.10 Dr
Ruthenberg’s Report which referenced the claimant’s strong sense of justice and
fairness.
732. Mr Boyd submitted that the “something arising” in 8.2 was not something which
fitted easily within the wording of s.15 when it was read with para 5.9 of the EHRC
Code. The claimant having made complaints of disability discrimination was not the
“result, effect or outcome” of his disability. He submitted that this aspect of the case
overlapped with the s.27 victimisation complaints brought by the claimant.
733. We find that the claimant making complaints about his disability is something
“arising as a consequence” of his disability in the sense that if he was not a disabled
person, he would not have the basis for bringing a disability discrimination complaint.
It seems to us that satisfies the “looser connection” required in a s.15 complaint
147

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
referred to in Sheikholeslami. For the avoidance of doubt, even allowing for that
looser connection we do not accept that there is sufficient evidence (factual or medical)
for us to conclude that the claimant’s tendency to challenge (what we have referred to
as “bloody mindedness” arose in consequence of the claimant’s disability of Autism,
even when exacerbated by his cancer diagnosis.
8.3 The claimant’s Autism, cancer diagnosis and cancer treatment combined made
him particularly vulnerable in terms of his mental health, to the extent that he was more
likely to be signed off work when put under stress...
734. Ms Dinnes did not pursue a claim based on this “something arising” in her
submissions for the claimant. Had she done so we would have preferred Mr Boyd’s
submission that there was no evidential basis for a finding that any of the alleged acts
of unfavourable treatment were in any way influenced by this
Issue 10: Was the claimant subjected to unfavourable treatment because of
these matters? The claimant alleges:
Issue 10.1 The respondent elected not to give the claimant a pay rise after he
began a new role in May 2021;
735. It is not disputed that in May 2021 the claimant requested a pay review and that
the outcome of that review was a decision not to increase his pay. We find that refusal
of a pay rise was unfavourable treatment.
736. The key issue is whether that unfavourable treatment was because of the
claimant’s manner of communication (something arising 8.1) or his having brought
discrimination complaints (something arising 8.2).
737. For the claimant, Ms Dinnes submitted that the decision to conduct a full pay
review and then not award a pay rise were highly unusual. She relied on the claimant’s
evidence that it was usual to award a pay rise without conducting a full pay review
when an employee was given additional responsibilities. She submitted that the pay
rises given to Mr Pope and Mr Young supported the claimant’s case that a pay rise
was the usual practice on taking on new responsibilities.
738. Ms Dinnes also submitted that it was clear that by the time of the 2021 pay
review decision Mr Cornwell, Mr Coupe and Mr Al-Qasmi were frustrated by the
claimant’s manner of communication. She submitted they resented giving the claimant
a pay rise when he had cost the respondent money and had got his way in the past
when it came to pay issues. The “only reasonable conclusion”, she submitted, was
that the claimant’s historical communication style and the fact that he had raised
complaints about discrimination in the past led to resentment which was an effective
cause of the decision to not give the claimant any pay rise at all.
739. For the respondent, Mr Boyd submitted that the evidence did not support the
claimant’s submissions that there was an agreement with Mr Bose that the proposed
pay review would lead to a pay rise for the claimant. We have explained in our findings
of fact why we accept that submission and find there was no such agreement. We also
accept his submission that the evidence does not support the claimant’s case that pay
rises were automatically given on taking up a new role particularly where that role was
not a promotion or did not involve a change in Grade. We also accept his submission
148

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
that (at least when it came to the Group) there was a practice of obtaining
benchmarking data. We do not accept there was such a practice when it came to the
respondent.
740. Mr Boyd submitted there was a clear, non-discriminatory explanation for the
decision not to give the claimant a pay rise. Mr Cornwell’s evidence was that there
was no rule or set practice across the business that pay rises were automatically given
on promotion or when an individual changed role. The evidence supported a finding
that Mr Cornwell had approached the issue fairly-it was he who made the point in email
to Mr AL-Qasmi that if someone was underpaid for the role they were performing then
they should address that. It was clearly a difficult financial situation for Group and the
respondent in 2021.
741. It was accepted that the Mercer data placed the claimant at the median of the
pay range for his role. Ms Dinnes submitted that left room for a pay rise to bring the
claimant’s salary up to a level nearer the top of that pay range. In response, Mr Boyd
submitted that the Mercer pay range was for the UK as a whole. If the effect of higher
salaries in London were stripped out, the likelihood was that the claimant was in fact
higher in the pay range for the North-West where he was employed. It was also
appropriate to take into account that the claimant was already the 4th highest paid
employee in the respondent.
742. Mr Boyd submitted that Mr Pope and Mr Young were not appropriate
comparators because they were in different circumstances. The respondent had
provided evidence of why their salaries had been raised (compensation for lost
overtime and a “flight risk”). He also submitted that the claimant’s manner of
communication was not a factor in the decision. The evidence showed that Mr
Cornwell had no real issue with the claimant being over-inclusive or direct in his
communications and had over the years made adjustments to accommodate that. Nor,
he submitted, was the claimant having previously brought discrimination complaints
an effective cause. He submitted that the claimant’s submission appeared to be that
Mr Cornwell had harboured a grudge since 2018 and exacted his revenge in 2021 by
denying the claimant a pay rise. The evidence did not support a finding that the 2018
grievance was an effective cause. Instead, the evidence showed Mr Cornwell had
shown a professional and positive attitude towards the claimant between 2018 and
2021.
743. We do find that by May 2021 the relationship between the claimant and the UK
SMT was strained. As Mr Cornwell told Ms Jones in the subsequent investigation, it
had reached the point where he was fearful of challenging the claimant in any way for
fear of the claimant’s reaction that challenge. We find that by 2021 the claimant’s
default position was to assert that any negative treatment of him was related either to
his disability or to his 2018 Grievance and Tribunal claim. That led to members to
members of the SMT being extra careful in how they communicated to or responded
to the claimant. It is evident both from their evidence to Ms Jones their emails to each
other that they would second guess themselves and ask UK SLT colleagues to sense
check what they had written to the claimant. We accept that there was a degree of
resentment towards the claimant always seeming to get his way, particularly on the
part of Mr Coupe. He had vented that frustration to Mr Cornwell when he had decided
to increase the claimant his 2019 Bonus.
149

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
744. We do not find, however, that the claimant’s manner of communication was a
significant influence on that situation. Nor was the fact of the claimant having made
complaints of discrimination. It was what we have called his bloody mindedness and
the management time and energy which it took to address his relentless pushback
which caused the strained relationship. As we have said in discussing the “fair
warning” issue under Issue 7 above, Mr Cornwell had expressed his concern about
that tendency to challenge on a number of occasions. As with the victimisation
complaint which we discuss below, we find that the effective cause of the resentment
and fearfulness on the part of the UK SLT was not the manner of the claimant’s
communication nor his having made complaints of discrimination, but the
relentlessness of his challenges to all adverse decisions and the manner of those
challenges.
745. We find that Mr Coupe, Mr AL-Qasmi and, in particular, Mr Cornwell had taken
steps to adjust their communication style with the claimant e.g. by communicating by
email wherever possible, providing advance notice of issues and (in Mr Cornwell’s
case) assisting him with emails to colleagues. We find the problem came when the
claimant’s demands about promotion, salary increases or bonus payments were not
met or when the claimant was subject to any kind of negative feedback.
746. We find that far from the strained relationship being a cause of the respondent
(in the person of Mr Cornwell) rejecting the claimant’s request for a pay rise, it meant
the respondent approached the issue with a great deal of rigour. We find that Mr
Cornwell was genuinely concerned to ensure that a fair decision was reached. That is
evident from his communications with Mr Al-Qasmi. We find he was also concerned to
ensure that the decision was demonstrably evidence based. That was important
because, we find, he anticipated that the claimant would challenge any decision which
did not go in his favour. That assumption was entirely reasonable given that the
claimant had a history of challenging pay and bonus decisions.
747. We do accept that obtaining benchmarking data appears to have been the
exception rather than the rule when it came to the respondent (as opposed to the
Group). There was no evidence, for example, of such data being sought in deciding
the pay rises for Mr Pope and Mr Young. It was not alleged that seeking benchmarking
data was itself unfavourable treatment. We cannot see how an employee could
reasonably view it as a disadvantage to obtain data to check whether they were fairly
paid. For the avoidance of doubt, we do not accept the suggestion that the obtaining
of the Mercer data was a sham to shore up a decision already made not to award a
pay rise.
748. A s.15 claim does not rely on showing less favourable treatment than
comparators. However, we accept that if there were appropriate comparators, the way
they were treated might cast light on the reason why a claimant was subjected to
unfavourable treatment. In this case, we do not accept that Mr Pope and Mr Young
were in the same circumstances as the claimant. We have accepted the respondent’s
evidence that their pay rises did not come about solely because they changed roles,
but due to factors specific to them. The decisions about their pay were also made in a
different financial climate, in the sense that, when their pay rises were awarded, Ms
Fuenfstueck had not issued her March 2021 warning about the need for to be cautious
and keep a particularly close eye on personnel costs.
150

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
749. We do accept, however, that there was no evidence of benchmarking in their
case or in other pay decisions by the respondent (as opposed to the Group). On
balance, we find that is sufficient to pass the burden of proof to the respondent. We
find, however, that the respondent has provided an adequate, non-discriminatory
explanation for its decision not to award pay rise. Its decision was evidence based,
relying on the Mercer data and taking into account the respondent’s financial
circumstances.
750. Our conclusion is that this complaint fails. Mr Cornwell’s decision not to award
the claimant a pay rise was not because of something arising from the claimant’s
disability.
Issue 10.2 The respondent launched an external investigation into the
claimant for sending an email on 3 September 2021;
751. It was not suggested that the decision to launch an external investigation was
not unfavourable treatment. We find that it was. Again, the issue was whether the
something arising in 8.1 or 8.2 was an effective cause of it. It was not disputed that the
immediate cause of the launching of the investigation was the claimant’s email to Ms
Fuenfstueck of 3 September.
752. Dealing first with 8.1. Ms Dinnes submitted that it was clear that it was the direct
nature of that email which deeply upset Mr Cornwell, and Mr Al-Qasmi and was an
effective cause of the unfavourable treatment. She characterised it as a “directly
worded but factual email” sent by the claimant as an act of desperation, at a time when
he was battling an aggressive form of cancer and was crying out for help and
reassurance.” She submitted that the “overreaction of Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi”
suggested that “other factors” were in play beyond the claimant’s 3 September 2021
email. She submitted that was also consistent with the scope of the investigation being
widened to include historical email correspondence and also consistent with the
evidence given by the respondent’s witnesses, with Mr Cornwell describing the email
as the straw that broke the camel’s back. She urged the Tribunal not to underestimate
the claimant’s difficulties in appreciating the unspoken rules of social engagement
which come naturally to other people.
753. Mr Boyd submitted that it was “remarkable” to characterise the 3 September
2021 email as “a directly worded but factual email”. It was, he submitted, fundamentally
critical of the abilities and good faith of Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi. He submitted
that the issue with the email was not that it was “overinclusive” or “direct”. The issue
was that it was highly critical of Mr Cornwell and Mr AL-Qasmi. That was, he submitted,
not a feature of the claimant’s Autism, but of his “not getting his own way”.
754. We prefer Mr Boyd’s submissions. Ms Dinnes in her submissions relating to the
unfair dismissal complaint (para 26) accepted that the email was “evidently very
embarrassing for Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi. We note that the claimant in the email
itself said that he had “considered carefully” before reaching out to Ms Fuenfstueck.
As we have previously noted, the claimant had on a previous occasion when he wrote
to her acknowledged that “even with his condition he knew it was not conventional to
write to her in that way”. We do not find that his decision to write to Ms Fuenfstueck
was something he did unknowingly because of a lack of appreciation of the rules of
social engagement.
151

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
755. We also accept that it was not the claimant’s manner of communication that
was the issue. It was the content of his email, i.e. telling Ms Fuenfstueck that Mr
Cornwell “had a problem with him”, had “blocked his pay” rise because of bias and
victimisation and that Mr AL-Qasmi did not seem capable of preventing escalation or
negotiating a path of compromise and that Mr Marquard’s appeal decision would be a
“hard-line position without balanced consideration”. It was sent while an internal
process was underway and cast doubt on the genuineness of that process. We find
the content of the email clearly had the potential to significantly undermine Mr Cornwell
and Mr Al-Qasmi in the eyes of the Group’s Chief Executive. In that context we do not
accept Ms Dinnes’s characterisation of Mr Cornwell raising his concerns about it as
an “overreaction”. We accept Mr Boyd’s submission that the effective cause of
launching the investigation was the concern that the email indicated the working
relationship with the UK SLT had broken down. The claimant’s manner of
communication was not a significant influence on that decision.
756. When it came to something arising 8.2, Ms Dinnes submitted that the UK SLT’s
attitude to the claimant changed in 2018 when he raised his grievance and brought
the 2018 Tribunal claim. She accepted that the UK SLT interpreted emails from the
claimant as “aggressive” or “threatening”. She accepted that they were “tone deaf” and
“direct” and “detailed” and that was something arising from the claimant’s Autism. It
was clear, she submitted, that the threat of an Equality Act 2010 claim was something
which was in the mind of the UK SLT by 2021 and was an effective cause of the
decision to launch the investigation.
757. Mr Boyd submitted that it was clear that the 2018 and 2021 grievances and
Tribunal claims were not what caused Mr Al-Qasmi to seek an outside investigation.
He also submitted that in reality, this complaint was best seen as a victimisation
complaint. We agree with Mr Boyd. It seems to us that 8.2 is best seen as a duplicate
of the victimisation complaint. We set out our reasons for dismissing the victimisation
complaint relating to this detriment/unfavourable treatment in relation to issue 18.2
below and do not repeat them here. In summary, we found that the claimant’s
grievances and Tribunal claims were not a significant influence on the decision to
launch an investigation. Instead, it was the manner in which he did so (what we have
referred to “bloody mindedness”). Those 2 things were separable. Putting it in terms
of the s.15 complaints, we find that something arising 8.2 (bringing the discrimination
complaints) was not a significant influence of unfavourable treatment 10.2. The
claimant’s “bloody mindedness” was, but we have found that was not something
arising from his disability.
758. We do not find that either of the “somethings arising” in 8.1 or 8.2 were a
significant influence on the launching of the investigation and this complaint fails.
Issue 10.3 The respondent proceeded with the investigation and dismissal
process in the absence of the claimant and the claimant was unable to
participate; and
759. It was not suggested that the decision to proceed with the investigation in the
absence of the claimant was not unfavourable treatment. We find that it was.
760. Ms Dinnes’s submission relied on the disproportionate or unreasonable nature
of the decision to continue with the investigation and dismissal process in the absence
152

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
of the claimant. That “harsh treatment” she submitted could only be understood by
refence to the UK SLT’s historical frustration with the claimant’s manner of
communication and his tendency to raise discriminatory issues. She submitted that
the respondent had not given any plausible explanation for proceeding with the
processes in the claimant’s absence rather than, e.g. waiting for the claimant to return
from sickness absence.
761. Mr Boyd submitted that at the point the claimant was told about the
investigation, he had returned to work and indicated that he was fit to return to work
full time. His initial absence was certified as due to cancer and nothing else. Mr Boyd
submitted that the evidence showed the respondent had made significant efforts to try
and engage with the claimant including trying to establish whether he was well enough
to engage in the process but the claimant had put up unnecessary blockages and
impediments to it doing so.
762. The decision not to postpone the initial investigation was, we find, made by Mr
Al-Qasmi. The decision not to postpone the “dismissal hearing” was made by Mr
Marquard in consultation with Ms Johnson.
763. We have found, in the context of the unfair dismissal complaint, that the
respondent acted unreasonably in not giving the claimant further time to recover.
However, we do not accept the claimant has proved facts from which we could
conclude that the failure to postpone the investigation or the dismissal hearing were
significantly influenced by his manner of communication (8.1) or his having brought
discrimination complaints (8.2). We accept Mr Boyd’s submission that the respondent
tried to take steps to establish whether the claimant was well enough to take part in
the investigation. The claimant frustrated those attempts through his insistence on
stringent conditions being complied with when it came to the OH adviser engaged to
provide that opinion. We find that the “direct“ or “over inclusive” manner of
communication in the exchanges was not a significant influence on the decisions to
proceed rather than postpone. What was a significant influence was the “bloody
mindedness” when it came to what the claimant would accept in terms of OH
practitioner.
764. We keep in mind that there can be more than one significant influence on a
decision. We have considered the submission which we understand to underlie the
claimant’s case on this point, which is that the respondent’s desire to hurry through
the process and “get rid” of the claimant could ultimately be traced back to his manner
of communication or his having previously brought complaints of discrimination. We
do not find the evidence supports that. As we have said in relation to the victimisation
complaint, the act of bringing discrimination complaints was not a significant influence
on the decisions taken. What was a significant influence was the manner of doing so,
i.e. the claimant’s “bloody mindedness” and the toll that had taken on his relationship
with the UK SLT and its drain on the respondent’s business.
765. This complaint fails.
Issue 10.4: The respondent dismissed the claimant and refused his appeal.
766. It was not suggested that the decisions to dismiss the claimant and refuse his
appeal did not amount to acts of unfavourable treatment. We find they were.
153

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
767. The decision to dismiss was made by Mr Marquard. The decision to refuse the
appeal was made by Mr d’Huc. The question we had to decide was whether something
arising 8.1. (Manner of communication) or 8.2 (bringing discrimination complaints) was
a significant, (i.e. more than trivial) influence on each of their decisions.
Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss
768. For the claimant, Ms Dinnes submitted that Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss
the claimant was made “ostensibly” on the basis that his relationship with the UK SLT
had irretrievably broken down. That decision echoed Ms Jones’s report which found
that the working relationship had irretrievably broken down. Ms Dinnes submitted that
Ms Jones’s report “recommended the claimant’s dismissal”. We find that is not
accurate – para 37 of Ms Jones’s report recommends that “consideration be given to
ending the employment relationship” (para 37 at p.900).
769. Ms Dinnes submitted that the only reasons given for the alleged breakdown in
relationship related to the claimant’s verbal and written manner of communication and
his tendency to raise discrimination and the possibility of discrimination claims. She
said the UK SLT referred to the problem being that the claimant’s emails felt
“aggressive” and “threatening”. She accepted that was how they felt to the recipients.
She submitted, however, that those were descriptions of how it felt to receive a “very
directly worded, tone deaf email about a decision they had made”. She submitted that
If we accepted that the claimant was dismissed for these reasons alone and accepted
that the claimant’s communication style and tendency to raise discrimination as an
issue were significantly influenced by ASD, it followed that the claimant was dismissed
solely due to matters arising from his disability.
770. Mr Boyd submitted that the respondent understood the claimant’s case to be
that (in relation to 8.1) features of the claimant’s Autism caused him to communicate
with the UK SLT in a certain manner that in due course led to the breakdown of
relationships, the breakdown of the relationships led to the termination of his
employment and therefore he was dismissed because of his Autism. That analysis, he
submitted was an oversimplification. The key to Mr Marquard’s decision was his
conclusion that the relationship seemed to have broken down irretrievably. Mr Boyd
submitted that was an “unimpeachable one”, based on the information before Mr
Marquard. Unless there was something that stood out like the proverbial sore thumb
from the material in Ms Jones’s report, it was logical that he would conclude that the
relationship had indeed broken down. He submitted that that was a conclusion that
was not materially influenced by ether of the “somethings arising” at paragraphs 8.1 to
8.2.
771. In relation to 8.1, Mr Boyd submitted that the “thematic” reason for the
breakdown of relationships was, as said by several witnesses, more to do with the
claimant challenging business decisions that he did not agree with (not that he could
not understand), and particularly decisions relating to pay and career progression. He
submitted the evidence supported a finding that the UK SLT found the claimant to be
aggressive and threatening. The experience of the UK SLT was, he said, a “real and
not illusory matter” and the impact on them was profound. He referred us to the
evidence about the
772. When it came to the complaint based on 8.2, Mr Boyd further relied on the
“separability” point also raised in relation to the victimisation complaints.
154

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
773. As we explain in our findings of fact, we found that Mr Marquard’s reasons for
dismissing the claimant were those set out in his letter of 24 February 2022.
774. When it comes to “something arising” 8.1, we accept the point made in Ms
Dinnes’s submission that we need to look not only at the “headline” reason why Mr
Marquard decided to dismiss (breakdown in relationship) but at the causes of that
breakdown (Sheikholeslami).
775. We find it was in part the claimant’s communication with Ms Fuenfstueck about
the UK SLT on 3 September 2021. That was the last straw, but the breakdown was
the result of the claimant’s communications with the UK SLT since 2017.
776. We accept Mr Boyd’s submission that the analysis does not end there. We need
to decide what aspect(s) of the communication contributed to the breakdown. Did it
include the “manner of communication” in 8.1., i.e. the claimant’s communications
being “direct” and “over-inclusive” such that it had a significant influence on the
decision to dismiss? We find it did not. Neither Mr Marquard’s reasons for dismissal
nor Ms Jones’s report refer to the claimant’s manner of communication in the 8.1.
sense. Instead, the focus is on the “aggressive and threatening tone” of the
communications and the UK SLT working in fear of such threats. Mr Marquard’s
findings in relation to the claimant’s manner of communication was that the UK SLT
had taken steps to understand his diagnosis and support him. As with Issue 10.2, we
do not find that the claimant’s manner of communication as defined in 8.1 was a
significant influence on Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss, either directly or as a
contributory factor in the breakdown of relationship.
Mr d’Huc’s decision to reject the appeal
777. For the claimant, Ms Dinnes submitted that in refusing the claimant’s appeal Mr
D’Huc relied on the fact that he had seen no positive communications between the
claimant and the UK SLT, that communication issues had occurred between the UK
SLT and the claimant many times, that claimant took a significant amount of time to
manage, and the effect of the claimant’s communications on the UK SLT. She
submitted that it followed that Mr d’Huc’s decision to refuse the appeal and uphold the
claimant’s dismissal was also solely based on matters arising from his disability i.e.
C’s communication style.
778. Mr Boyd submitted that the points made in relation to Mr Marquard’s decision
to dismiss could be made with even more force in relation to Mr d’Huc’s decision to
refusal of the appeal.
779. As with Mr Marquard’ decision to dismiss, we prefer Mr Boyd’s submissions.
We find the claimant’s manner of communication in the 8.1. sense was not a significant
influence on Mr d’Huc’s decision. His central conclusion, we find, was that it had
become an impossible position because whenever feedback was given which the
claimant did not like he would become threatening or aggressive in tone, e.g. the 2018
and 2019 bonus issues. That was not based on the claimant’s “direct” or “over-
inclusive” manner of communication. As with Issue 10.2, we do not find that the
claimant’s manner of communication as defined in 8.1 was a significant influence on
Mr d’Huc’s decision to refuse the appeal, either directly or as a contributory factor in
the breakdown of relationship.
155

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
780. As with the decision to dismiss, it seems to us that the complaint based on 8.2
in relation to the dismissal and refusal of appeal duplicates the victimisation complaint
in 18.3. We have set out our reasons for dismissing that complaint below and do not
repeat them here. In summary, we found that the claimant’s raising grievances and
Tribunal claims were not a significant influence on the decision to refuse the appeal.
Instead, it was the manner in which he did so (what we have referred to “bloody
mindedness”). Those 2 things were separable. Putting it in terms of the s.15
complaints, we find that something arising 8.2 (bringing the discrimination complaints)
was not a significant influence on the unfavourable treatment 10.4. The claimant’s
“bloody mindedness” was, but we have found that was not something arising from his
disability.
781. This complaint fails.
Issue 11: Has the respondent shown that the treatment was a proportionate
means of achieving a legitimate aim? The respondent alleges that its legitimate
aim is as follows:
Issue 11.1 The carrying out a pay review process - to make decisions on pay
reviews that were appropriate and in line with market conditions and the
performance of the business.
782. Mr Boyd confirmed in his submissions that had we found that the refusal to
grant the pay rise was because of something arising in consequence of the claimant’s
disability, the respondent would not have sought to rely on the statutory defence. Had
we decided issue 10.1 in the claimant’s favour, therefore, the complaint relating to the
refusal of a pay rise under s.15 would have succeeded.
Issue 11.2 Launching an external Investigation – to deal with the grievance
in a fair and reasonable manner.
783. If we are wrong on issue 10.2 and the something arising in 8.1 or 8.2 was an
effective cause of the launching of an external investigation, Mr Boyd relied on that
being a proportionate means of achieving the legitimate aim of dealing with the
grievance in a fair and reasonable manner. Had we been required to deal with this
issue we would have accepted that as a legitimate aim.
784. Ms Dinnes submitted that there were other more proportionate steps which
could have been taken short of launching an investigation. She suggested that
relevant factors included that the issue was one of Mr Cornwell’s (over) reaction to the
claimant’s behaviour and that the claimant was facing life threatening cancer and the
grievance appeal. She said that it was “difficult to imagine any circumstances where it
was appropriate to hire an external investigator with no professional experience of
ASD to examine the communications of an autistic individual“. She submitted that it
was not proportionate to hire an external investigator without first taking steps to
resolve the communication difficulties between the UK SLT and the claimant. She also
submitted that it would also have been appropriate to warn the claimant that the UK
SLT was “finding his communication difficult to manage” and “to seek professional
support and training” for the UK SLT.
156

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
785. In his submissions, Mr Boyd relied on the points made in relation to the “fair
warning” issue in the unfair dismissal complaints (Issue 7). He also submitted that it
was clearly proportionate to hire an external investigator where a Manging Director
had raised a grievance and there were serious concerns that the working relationship
had broken down. If a more junior employee had been appointed that would have been
legitimately subject to criticism. Appointing a non-UK senior manager would have not
been appropriate because they would have needed an understanding of UK
employment law. Appointing an external consultant who could advise the person
appointed to make the decision on UK Employment Law struck the correct balance.
He submitted that Ms Jones was perfectly suited to carrying out a robust investigation.
We accept his submission that the claimant has asserted a lack of “professional
knowledge of Autism” on her part without engaging with her to test that.
786. We prefer Mr Boyd’s submissions. We have explained when dealing with issue
7 in relation to the unfair dismissal complaint why mediation was not at that stage
appropriate and why we found fair warning had been given. Had we been required to
decide the issue we would have preferred Mr Boyd’s submissions and found that the
respondent’s instructing an external person to carry out an investigation was a
proportionate means of achieving its legitimate aim.
Issue 11.3 Proceeding with the investigation and dismissal process in the
absence of the claimant and the claimant being unable to participate - to
deal with the grievance in a fair and reasonable manner.
787. Had we found that this complaint amounted to unfavourable treatment because
of something arising for the claimant’s disability we would have not accepted that the
respondent’s approach was a proportionate means of achieving what we accept was
a legitimate aim. We have explained in the context of the unfair dismissal complaint
why we considered that the decision not to postpone the dismissal hearing was not
within the band of reasonableness. Had we been required to, we would have found it
was also not a proportionate means of achieving this legitimate aim. It would have
been proportionate to give the claimant more time to agree to undergo an OH
assessment and to provide more evidence to the investigation process. We accept it
would not have been proportionate to delay the process indefinitely.
Issue 11.4 Dismissal of the claimant and refusing his appeal - following a
fair process to determine whether the working relationship between the
claimant and the respondent’s senior management had broken down
irretrievably and if so, what the outcome should be.
788. Had we found that the decision to dismiss the claimant and refuse his appeal
was because of something arising in consequence of his disability we would have
found that this complaint succeeded. Mr Boyd’s submissions did not address this
legitimate aim. Ms Dinnes submitted the legitimate aim was circular and made no
sense. Dismissing the claimant could not be a proportionate means of achieving the
legitimate aim of “following a fair process to determine whether the working
relationship had broken down”. We agree. We accept there might be legitimate aims
which could have been relied on, e.g. ensuring the effective working of the UK SLT,
but that is not what was pleaded. Had we been required to decide this issue, we would
157

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
find that the legitimate aim pleaded could not justify the claimant’s dismissal or the
refusal of his appeal.
Harassment on the grounds of disability (s.26 Equality Act 2010)
Issue 12: What “unwanted conduct” does the claimant rely upon? The claimant
alleges that the following was unwanted conduct:
Issue 12.1: The respondent launched an external investigation into the
claimant for sending an email on 3 September 2021;
Issue 12.2 The respondent proceeded with the investigation and dismissal
process in the absence of the claimant, while the claimant was under
considerable mental strain and was unable to participate; and 12.3. The
respondent dismissed the claimant because of the symptoms of his
disability and the fact that he had made disability discrimination
complaints previously.
Issue 13: Did the alleged conduct take place?
789. It was not disputed that the conduct took place. It was also not disputed that the
conduct was unwanted.
Issue 14: Was the alleged conduct related to a relevant protected characteristic,
namely the claimant’s disability?
790. Ms Dinnes’s submission was that unwanted conduct was related to the
claimant’s disability because the decisions to launch the investigation, continue in the
claimant’s absence and dismiss all arose ultimately from his disability. Mr Boyd
submitted the unwanted conduct was not related to a relevant protected characteristic.
791. The parties’ submissions in effect repeated those relating to the s.15
complaints. We have found the unfavourable treatment at 10.2 -10.4 (which mirror the
unwanted conduct at 12.1-12.3) were not because of something arising in
consequence of the claimant’s disability. On the same basis, we find that the unwanted
conduct was not related to the claimant’s disability.
792. The harassment complaints fail on that basis
Issue 15 Did the alleged conduct have the purpose or effect of creating an
intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the
claimant, subject to the considerations of s.26(4) Equality Act 2010?
793. The claimant accepted that the unwanted conduct did not have a harassing
purpose. Had we been required to decide the issue we would also have found that the
conduct did not meet the threshold for having a harassing effect. We accept the
claimant found the unwanted conduct to have that effect, but we do not accept it was
reasonable for it to have that effect. Viewed objectively, it was not reasonable for the
launching of the investigation, the process followed and the decision to dismiss to have
a harassing effect given the threshold required for that effect. The process and
decision was undoubtedly stressful and upsetting, but we do not find that viewed
objectively that meets the definition in s.27 Equality Act 2010.
158

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
Victimisation (s.27 Equality Act 2010)
Issue 16: Has the claimant proved the protected acts he relies upon? These are:
16.1 2018 grievance and Employment Tribunal claim;
16.2 2021 grievance and Employment Tribunal claim; and
16.3 The claimant’s email of 3 September 2021.
Issue 17: Does any protected act fall within of section 27(2) Equality Act 2010?
794. The respondent accepted that 16.1 and 16.2 were protected acts for the
purposes of s.27(2) of the Equality Act 2010. It did not accept that 16.3 was. Mr Boyd
did not deal with this issue in his submissions.
795. Ms Dinnes submitted that the references in the 3 September 2021 email to
“bias” and “victimisation” together with the reference to the Tribunal time limit and the
contents of the attached 2021 Grievance were sufficient to make it a protected act for
the purposes of s.27(2)(c) and (d) of the Equality Act 2010.
796. We accept that submission. Had the email been sent in isolation, we would not
have found it sufficient to be a protected act. It referred to “victimisation” and “bias” but
in a broad way which did not on the face of it link the “victimisation” to the claimant’s
2018 grievance or Tribunal claim. While we accept that a protected act need not refer
explicitly to the Equality Act 2010 or set out the elements of a claim under that act, we
do not find that the reference to the Tribunal time limit would have been enough to
make it a protected act.
797. However, the claimant attached to the email his 2021 Grievance. In that he
made it clear he was alleging disability discrimination and victimisation in breach of
the Equality Act 2010 because of his 2018 Grievance and Tribunal claim. Given that
the email expressly asked Ms Fuenfstueck to read the attachments we find the correct
approach is to view the email and attachments as one. When that is done we do find
that the email was a protected act for the purposes of s.27(d) (making an allegation of
breach of the Equality Act 2010. If we are wrong about that we would have found that
it fell withing the “catch-all” category at s.27(2)(c).
.
Issue 18: Was the claimant subjected to a detriment because of a protected act?
798. We deal with each of the 3 alleged detriments in turn.
Issue 18.1: The claimant alleges that The respondent elected not to give the
claimant a pay rise after he began a new role in May 2021;
799. The protected act relied on for this detriment was the 2018 Grievance and
Tribunal Claim (16.1). The other protected acts post-dated the detriment.
800. In her submissions, Ms Dinnes relied in part on the points made in relation to
Issue 10.1, i.e. what she characterised as the unusual approach taken in dealing with
the claimant’s pay review request. She also submitted that the 2018 Grievance and
159

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
Tribunal claim were clearly still in the minds of Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi in 2021.
She relied on the references to them made in their evidence to Ms Jones’s
investigation.
801. Mr Boyd also relied on his submissions in relation to issue 10.1 The
respondent, he submitted, had provided an adequate non-discriminatory explanation
for the decision to refuse the pay rise. He did not suggest that separability was a
relevant issue for this detriment.
802. In deciding issue 10.1 we concluded that the approach which was taken in
deciding whether to award the claimant a pay rise was due in part to Mr Cornwell
anticipating that the claimant would challenge any decision which did not go in his
favour. However, we do not find that that fear was a significant influence on the
decision not to grant a pay rise. Instead, it resulted in the respondent ensuring it had
taken a rigorous, evidence-based approach to making the decision. We accept there
had been resentment in the past at the claimant getting bonus awards that Mr Cornwell
felt he did not deserve, e.g. the 2019 bonus award which prompted Mr Coupe’s “sticks
in the throat” comment. We do not find that leads to the conclusion that Mr Cornwell
and Mr Al-Qasmi (who ultimately made the pay rise decision) would have denied the
claimant a pay rise which the evidence showed he deserved. We find that Mr Cornwell
was genuinely concerned to ensure that if a pay rise was merited, it would be granted.
There was no evidence that Mr Al-Qasmi had expressed the sort of resentment
referred to by Mr Coupe.
803. We do not accept that the claimant has shown facts from which we could
conclude that the decision not to award him a pay rise was significantly influenced by
his 2018 Grievance and Claim. If we are wrong about that and the burden did pass,
we would have found that the respondent has provided an adequate, non-
discriminatory explanation for its decision not to award pay rise. Its decision was
evidence based, relying on the Mercer data and taking into account the respondent’s
financial circumstances and was not materially influenced by the protected act at 16.1.
804. Our conclusion is that this complaint fails. The decision not to award the
claimant a pay rise was not an act of victimisation.
Issue 18.2: The claimant alleges that the claimant was investigated for
sending the Email of 3 September 2021
805. It was not disputed that the launching of an investigation amounts to a
detriment.
806. The parties also agreed that the email was the trigger for instigating Ms Jones’s
investigation.
807. For the claimant, Ms Dinnes submitted that all 3 protected acts significantly
influenced the decision made by Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi to investigate the
claimant “as a way of removing the claimant from the business”. She repeated the
substance of the submissions made in relation to issue 10.2. She submitted that it was
clear from their evidence to Ms Jones’s investigation that the members of the UK SLT
complained about the claimant raising disability discrimination and the possibility of
litigation.
160

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
808. For the respondent, Mr Boyd relied on the points made in relation to 10.2. he
also submitted that the issue of severability was relevant to this complaint. He relied
on what was said in Fecitt, i.e. that where the issue is the manner in which a protected
act is done the need to resolve a difficult and dysfunctional situation could “provide a
lawful explanation for imposing detrimental treatment on [in that case] an innocent
whistleblower.”
809. We bear in mind the importance placed in the case-law on being sceptical and
cautious in identifying reasons for alleged detriments separate from the protected acts
themselves. Equally, we bear in mind that the fact that someone has done a protected
act does not mean that an employer is precluded in acting towards them in any way
which causes them a disadvantage (see Fecitt). Otherwise, an employer would be
entirely hamstrung in seeking to resolve a situation involving allegations of
discrimination or s.27 victimisation by the fear of any action it took in itself giving rise
to a victimisation claim.
810. We do find in this case that the protected acts and the manner in which they
were made are separable. As we said in relation to 10.2, we found the effective cause
of launching the investigation was the concern that the 3 September 2021 email
indicated the working relationship with Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi had broken down.
The 2021 Grievance had not caused the launch of an investigation. Instead, the
respondent had sought to deal with it through a formal grievance process which we
find to have been reasonable and fair. As part of that process, Mrs Deakin had sought
to investigate the allegations of discrimination raised by the claimant. She had been
stymied in doing so because of the claimant’s objections and pre-conditions for
contacting Mr Bose, who the claimant said had evidence of discrimination. The
claimant’s appeal against the Grievance outcome had also not prompted the launching
of the investigation.
811. The 2021 Tribunal claim was not issued until 21 September 2021. We found
that before that date, Mr Al-Qasmi was already taking steps to seek legal advice on
the appropriate steps to take in response to the claimant’s 3 September email. There
was no suggestion in Ms Dinnes’s submissions that the issuing of that Tribunal claim
was what triggered the investigation.
812. In other words, the claimant had raised allegations of discrimination and
victimisation before and that had not prompted action. He had also written to Ms
Fuenfstueck direct before, and that had not prompted action. Mr d’Huc in the dismissal
appeal outcome letter confirmed that writing to the Group CEO was not the issue per
se. We find that it was the way the claimant raised the issues which triggered that. As
we have said in relation to 10.2, he raised the allegations in an email to the Group
CEO, in which he clearly cast doubt on the good faith and competence of Mr Cornwell
and the competence of Mr Al-Qasmi. He did so while an internal grievance appeal was
still underway.
813. In those circumstances, we find that that the alleged detriment was not
“because of” (in the sense of being significantly influenced by) the protected act
(specifically the 3 September email) but because of the way in which that act was
done. We accept as genuine Mr Cornwell’s view that the working relationship with the
claimant had broken down. The launch of the investigation was, to adopt the language
161

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
used in Fecitt, a genuine attempt by the respondent to address a “dysfunctional”
situation.
814. The complaint of victimisation based on this detriment fails.
Issue 18.3: The claimant alleges that he was dismissed and his appeal was
denied.
815. This issue involves 2 detriments. The first is Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss.
The second is Mr d’Huc’s decision to refuse the claimant’s appeal against hat
dismissal. It was not disputed that either amounts to a detriment.
Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss
816. For the claimant, Ms Dinnes submitted that Mr Marquard based his decision to
dismiss on Ms Jones’s recommendation. Ms Jones’s report was based on evidence
and documentation provided by the UK SLT, which specifically complained about the
claimant raising disability discrimination and the possibility of litigation. Ms Dinnes
submitted that Mr Marquard’s decision wholly supported Ms Jones’s conclusions and
recommendations and specifically referred to comments made by Mr AL-Qasmi and
Mr Cornwell to Ms Jones which emphasised the negative impact of the claimant raising
grievances and claims. She pointed out that his outcome letter stated that "It is
important that both sides have to have mutual respect and must not have to work in
fear of threats of discrimination, victimisation and potential litigation." Those comments
alone, she submitted, indicated that the claimant 's 2018 and 2021 grievances and
Tribunal claims had a significant influence on Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss the
claimant. She also submitted that it was clear from Mr Marquard’s letter that the 3
September email was of central importance, referring to the serious allegations made
about Mr Al-Qasmi and Mr Cornwell. She submitted that it was clear from his cross-
examination evidence that Mr Marquard was referring to the grievance about disability
discrimination attached to the email and the reference to victimisation made in it.
817. Mr Boyd relied on the “separability” point made in relation to 10.4 and 18.2.
818. We have found that Mr Marquard relied heavily on Ms Jones’s report and did
not read the Appendices in any detail. Of the 3 protected acts relied on by the claimant
it is clear that he was aware of the 3 September 2021 email to Ms Fuenfstueck. It was
referenced in his letter and was specifically referenced in the introduction to Ms
Jones’s Report. When it comes to the other protected acts, the 2018 grievance is
specifically referenced in the Report as marking the turning point in the claimant’s
attitude towards the UK SLT (and Mr Coupe in particular) rather than as marking a
turning point in their treatment of the claimant. The Report does not refer specifically
to the 2018 Tribunal Claim nor to the 2021 Grievance and Tribunal Claim. In his cross-
examination evidence, which we accept, Mr Marquard said that those matters were
not in his mind when he made his decision.
819. In her report, Ms Jones reported that the UK SLT recognised that employees
would and had the right to disagree with decisions taken, but that in the claimant’s
case, it is the “tone and approach that has become very difficult” (para 30). She said
that “preventing and limiting the claimant’s threats to raise a grievance, go to ACAS or
raise a tribunal claim had led to senior leaders “giving in” and compromising their own
judgments and decision making” (para 30). She also reported that the UK SLT “felt
162

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
there was no compromise with the claimant, it was his way or the highway to a tribunal
on all matters” (para 27). We accept that was the way the UK SLT genuinely felt.
820. We do not accept Ms Dinnes’s characterisation of Mr Marquard’s cross
examination evidence. She put to him that in summary, UK SLT’s complaints were
about (i) the claimant’s manner of communication (ii) the fact the claimant had raised
discrimination in the past and the fear of a repeat and (iii) the time spent dealing with
the claimant and the stress that generated. Mr Marquard rejected that. He accepted
that dealing with the claimant was time consuming and also accepted that there was
a fear of more complaints. He said, however, that more important was that the claimant
had questioned the leadership style of Mr Cornwell, questioned Mr Al-Qasmi’s
capabilities and questioned Mrs Deakin’s capability to manage the grievance. His
conclusion based on the evidence he had seen was that there was no trust from the
claimant in the UK SLT, that the day-to-day relationship had broken down and that
there was no willingness to change that.
821. We find that accurately reflects Mr Marquard’s reasons for dismissal. We find
that the fact of the claimant having brought previous grievances and Tribunal claims
was not, per se, a significant influence on Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss. We note
that in the UK SLT’s interviews with Ms Jones (which Ms Dinnes referred to in her
submissions) the UK SLT acknowledged the claimant’s right to challenge decisions
including by way of grievance and Tribunal. The issue was with UK SLT having to
“work in fear of threats of discrimination, victimisation and potential litigation”. We have
considered carefully whether that is something which is separable from the bringing of
discrimination complaints. We have decided it is. We accept Mr Boyd’s submission
that while the manner in which the claimant raised the threat of discrimination
complaints was a significant influence on Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss, the fact
of bringing the complaints was not.
822. When it comes to the 3 September 2021 email, our conclusion is the same. We
find that the email per se was not a significant influence on Mr Marquard’s decision,
but the manner of it. We accept his cross-examination evidence that it was not making
allegations of discrimination or victimisation against Mr Cornwell and Mr Al-Qasmi
which was the issue. We find that consistent with the fact that there was no suggestion
of dismissing the claimant as a result of making the 2021 grievance which made
exactly those allegations. We find that the 2 significant issues for Mr Marquard were
those set out in his outcome letter. The first was that writing direct to Ms Fuenfstueck
while the grievance appeal process was ongoing undermined that process and those
involved in it. The second was the serious allegations he made about Mr Cornwell’s
and Mr Al-Qasmi in the email (as opposed to in the attached grievance). We find Mr
Marquard viewed those allegations as being about their competence and capabilities
rather than being by way of allegations of discrimination and victimisation.
823. This complaint fails. We find that none of the protected acts were a significant
influence on Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss
Mr d’Huc’s decision to refuse the appeal
824. Ms Dinnes submitted that in refusing the appeal against dismissal, Mr d’Huc
also referred to the claimant’s protected acts in support of his conclusion. She invited
us to find that they were a significant influence on his decision, in the sense of being
more than a trivial influence.
163

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
825. The respondent also relied on the separability point when it came to this
detriment.
826. We prefer the respondent’s submissions. We found that the appeal outcome
letter accurately reflected Mr d’Huc’s reasons for rejecting the appeal. In the
"Outcome" section of his letter, Mr d'Huc acknowledged it was every employee's right
to raise a grievance or submit a complaint to an Employment Tribunal. However, he
said "to use these rights as a threat is not conducive to a healthy working environment
for anyone involved."
827. In his outcome letter Mr d'Huc stressed that the 3 September 2021 email was
"really not my focus". Any employee could email the CEO of the Group. When
reaching his decision, he had focussed on the effect that the claimant's
communications had on Mr Cornwell and other members of the SMT” and that "when
a manager feels fearful of providing feedback and as a consequence, projects are
delayed, customers could be let down and the business could suffer, I find that the
needs of the business are being neglected for one employee and as such the
Company cannot sustain this.”
828. As with Mr Marquard’s decision to dismiss, we find that it was not the making
of discrimination complaints or the act of writing to Ms Fuenfstueck per se which
influenced Mr d’Huc’s decision, but the manner in which that was done. The 2 are in
this case separable. We find that while the manner of doing them was a significant
influence on his decision, the protected acts themselves were not.
829. Complaint 18.3 fails.
Issues on Remedy
830. The parties were agreed that this hearing would deal with liability only. It was
agreed, however, that as is the Tribunal’s common practice we would make our
findings on Polkey and “contributory fault” (Issue 22) in this judgement.
831. Although not specifically identified in the list of issues, it was also agreed that
we would in this judgment decide whether the ACAS Code applied and, if so, whether
and what uplift we would apply to any compensation awarded.
Issue 22: To what extent should any award be reduced due to Polkey or by
reason of contributory fault?
The Polkey Issue
832. In her supplementary written submissions Ms Dinnes submitted that the
claimant’s dismissal was so far from fair that it was very difficult to make a sensible
prediction about what would have happened had appropriate steps been taken in
relation to the claimant. On balance, she submitted that the most credible conclusion
to draw from the evidence was that had the issues with the claimant’s
communication style been addressed directly and appropriately, there was a strong
chance of the relationship recovering.
833. In his submissions, Mr Boyd relied on Dr Ruthenberg’s comments about the
extent of the claimant’s upset following the decision not to appoint him to the role of
164

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
IT Director and the decision not to give the claimant a pay rise. Ms Dinnes submitted
that ignored Mr Ruthenberg’s response to the respondent’s questions in which he
“tentatively rejected R’s suggestion that the employment would have become
untenable from C’s point of view” (pp. 1369-1370, paras 3, 4 & 5). She submitted that
Mr Boyd’s suggestion that the working relationship was effectively doomed because
of the claimant’s alleged bitterness towards the UK SLT also ignored the fact that it
was the UK SLT and not the claimant who raised issues with the relationship in
2021. She submitted that it was evident from the documentation that the claimant
fought for his job to the last (pp. 985-988) which was consistent with the fact that he
had been employed by the respondent for his entire working life and was particularly
resistant to change on account of his Autism
834. Mr Boyd submitted that all the evidence supported the conclusion that the
working relationship had broken down irretrievably. It was clear from the evidence
that not being appointed to an IT Director role and the lack of a pay increase in mid-
2021 was “catastrophic” for the claimant (to use the claimant’s own repeated
phraseology). In April 2022 at the time of his next pay review, whether the decision
maker on that was Mr Coupe or Mrs Deakin any failure to provide the claimant with
what he believed he was entitled to would have led to further complaint and in all
likelihood further litigation. Any future Managing Director would have faced the same
sort of problem. In effect, Mr Boyd submitted, despite the claimant’s protestations,
relationships with him and present or future members of the UK SLT were poisoned,
and damaged in a manner where a workable relationship was no longer possible
835. We have found that the claimant’s dismissal was unfair because of 2 flaws in
the process followed by the respondent. The first was in not allowing further time in
the process prior to dismissal. The second was in Mr Marquand not sufficiently
challenging Ms Jones at the dismissal hearing.
836. The Polkey exercise is of its nature speculative. We considered what would
have happened had the respondent followed a fair procedure by allowing the
claimant more time. We accept the respondent could not have delayed indefinitely.
We find it would have been reasonable to postpone the dismissal hearing for a
period of 6 weeks. That would have given time for the claimant to consider the
information about Dr Rooms's qualifications and decide whether to attend an OH
appointment. It would have given him more time to recover and potentially attend the
hearing. It would have given him more time to provide further information.
837. Based on the evidence we saw and heard, we find that the claimant would not
have accepted the respondent’s assurances about Dr Rooms’s qualifications and
would not have attended the OH appointment. We have taken into account Dr
Ruthenberg’s view at answers 3,4 and 5 to the respondent’s questions (pp.1369-
1370). We note he refers to his view as “speculative”. We mean no disrespect in
departing from his view. It seems to us that the factual evidence clearly shows the
claimant had an absolutely fixed position that only an Autism specialist (as defined
and evidenced to his satisfaction) could understand the impact of his Autism on him.
Based on the background to the obtaining of the Aspiedent report (which itself was
rejected in part by the claimant) and of the attempts to set up an OH appointment as
part of the investigation process we find that there was a 100% chance the claimant
would not have agreed to attend an OH appointment even had a 6-week
165

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
postponement been granted. We find that additional time would not have resulted in
the claimant being well enough to attend the dismissal hearing.
838. We find that after a 6-week delay, the hearing could fairly have proceeded,
and it would have proceeded without the claimant. We find there is a probability that
the claimant would have supplied further evidence, most specifically in the form of
the Message Analysis Summary. We have set out the flaws in that evidence when
discussing Issue 6.
839. We find that had Mr Marquard have challenged Ms Jones more forcibly at the
hearing it would have been clearer that the overall picture was one of periods of calm
punctuated by flashpoints rather than constant friction. We find, however, that that
would not have resulted in a different outcome. A decision that the relationship had
broken down was, we find, one that was inevitably within the band of
reasonableness even had that broader perspective been clearer.
840. We do not accept Ms Dinnes’s submission that it was the UK SLT and not the
claimant who raised issues with the relationship in 2021. It was the claimant’s email
to Ms Fuenfstueck which triggered the process which resulted in the claimant’s
dismissal. We prefer Mr Boyd’s submission that the claimant did harbour bitterness
towards the UK SLT which meant the relationship with it (even absent Mr Cornwell)
was doomed. The claimant in his communications suggested on a number of
occasions that his challenge was to the logic of decisions not to the people making
those decisions. We find that does not square with the evidence. His 2018 grievance
referred to his loss of trust in Mr Coupe’s impartiality, objectivity and ability to
represent his interests. He accused Mrs Deakin of bias and Mr Al-Qasmi of lacking
capability. He said Mr Cornwell “had a problem with him”. He accused the UK SLT of
being “dysfunctional”. Those are not challenges to logic but to the persons
concerned.
841. We find that even had a fair process been followed, there was a 100% change
that the claimant would have been fairly dismissed 6 weeks later than he was.
The “contributory fault” issue
842. Ms Dinnes submitted that the claimant it could not be “culpable and
blameworthy“ conduct where the communication issues giving rise to the claimant’s
dismissal arose from his Autism. We accept that proposition.
843. However, our finding was that the conduct which led to the claimant’s dismissal
was not something arising in consequence of the claimant’s Autism. We prefer Mr
Boyd’s submission that the claimant was blameworthy and culpable to a very large
extent in the breakdown in relationships The evidence supports the conclusion that
the claimant was aware that writing to Ms Fuenfstueck was unusual even with his
Autism (his email of 14 April 2019). Had the claimant not emailed on 3 September the
process leading to his dismissal would not have happened. We find that in light of that,
and his previous “bloody mindedness” which had brought working relationship to the
edge of the precipice prior to that email, a deduction of 100% is appropriate both in
relation to the compensatory and basic awards. We reduce both to zero.
The ACAS Code Issue
166

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
168

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
Annex
Agreed List of Issues
Preliminary issues
Time limitation
1. The claimant confirmed that in respect of Claim 1 the act relied upon is the refusal
to make a pay award June 2021. Therefore, the respondent accepted that there
were no limitation issues.
Disability
2. The respondent accepts that the claimant was disabled at the time his claims
relate to and that it had actual knowledge of the claimant’s disabilities. The
claimant received a diagnosis of autism in October 2015 and a diagnosis of
cancer on 3 August 2021.
Unfair Dismissal
3. Did the respondent dismiss the claimant for a potentially fair reason within the
meaning of section 98 Employment Rights Act 1996?
3.1 The respondent alleges that the reason for the dismissal was capability
and/or conduct and/or some other substantial reason, namely a
breakdown in trust and in the working relationship between the claimant
and senior leaders of the respondent.
4. If yes, did the respondent in fact dismiss the claimant for the potentially fair
reason that it alleges?
5. To the extent relevant, did the respondent conduct a reasonable investigation?
6. Did the respondent follow a fair procedure?
7. If the respondent dismissed for a potentially fair reason, did the respondent act
reasonably in all the circumstances in dismissing the claimant pursuant to section
98(4) ERA 1996?
Discrimination arising from disability (s.15 Equality Act 2010)
169

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
8. What were the matters “arising in consequence of [his] disability” on which the
claimant relies? The claimant alleges that:
8.1 The claimant’s manner of communication can be very direct and detailed,
and he finds it more difficult to pick up on social cues. These
consequences of his autism were exacerbated by his cancer diagnosis,
which has placed the claimant under considerable mental strain;
8.2 The claimant has made complaints about being discriminated against on
the grounds of his disability; and
8.3 The claimant’s autism, cancer diagnosis and cancer treatment combined
made him particularly vulnerable in terms of his mental health, to the
extent that he was more likely to be signed off work when put under stress.
9. In relation to each of these:
9.1 Has that been proved by the claimant?
9.2 Does it fall within the statutory provisions.
10. Was the claimant subjected to unfavourable treatment because of these matters?
The claimant alleges:
10.1 The respondent elected not to give the claimant a pay rise after he began
a new role in May 2021;
10.2 The respondent launched an external investigation into the claimant for
sending an email on 3 September 2021;
10.3 The respondent proceeded with the investigation and dismissal process
in the absence of the claimant and the claimant was unable to participate;
and
10.4 The respondent dismissed the claimant and refused his appeal.
11. Has the respondent shown that the treatment was a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim? The respondent alleges that its legitimate aim is as
follows:
11.1 The carrying out a pay review process - to make decisions on pay reviews
that were appropriate and in line with market conditions and the
performance of the business.
11.2 Launching an external Investigation – to deal with the grievance in a fair
and reasonable manner.
11.3 Proceeding with the investigation and dismissal process in the absence of
the claimant and the claimant being unable to participate - to deal with the
grievance in a fair and reasonable manner.
170

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
11.4 Dismissal of the claimant and refusing his appeal - following a fair process
to determine whether the working relationship between the claimant and
the respondent’s senior management had broken down irretrievably and
if so, what the outcome should be.
Harassment on the grounds of disability (s.26 Equality Act 2010)
12. What “unwanted conduct” does the claimant rely upon? The claimant alleges that
the following was unwanted conduct:
12.1 The respondent launched an external investigation into the claimant for
sending an email on 3 September 2021;
12.2 The respondent proceeded with the investigation and dismissal process
in the absence of the claimant, while the claimant was under considerable
mental strain and was unable to participate; and 14.3. The respondent
dismissed the claimant because of the symptoms of his disability and the
fact that he had made disability discrimination complaints previously.
13. Did the alleged conduct take place?
14. Was the alleged conduct related to a relevant protected characteristic, namely
the claimant’s disability?
15. Did the alleged conduct have the purpose or effect of creating an intimidating,
hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the claimant, subject
to the considerations of s.26(4) Equality Act 2010?
Victimisation (s.27 Equality Act 2010)
16. Has the claimant proved the protected acts he relies upon? These are:
16.1 2018 grievance and Employment Tribunal claim;
16.2 2021 grievance and Employment Tribunal claim; and
16.3 The claimant’s email of 3 September 2021.
17. Does any protected act fall within of section 27(2) Equality Act 2010?
18. Was the claimant subjected to a detriment because of a protected act? The
claimant alleges that:
18.1 The respondent elected not to give the claimant a pay rise after he began
a new role in May 2021;
18.2 The claimant was investigated for sending the Email; and
18.3 The claimant was dismissed and his appeal was denied.
Remedy
171

Case Nos. 2411199/2021
2403516/2022
19. What financial losses have been suffered by the claimant?
20. What financial losses have been caused by the dismissal and/or discrimination
and/or detriment?
21. Has the claimant failed to mitigate his losses?
22. To what extent should any award be reduced due to Polkey or by reason of
contributory fault?
23. What injury to feelings award should be made?
172