Case Number: 2412866/2023
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant Respondent
Mrs J Hoyle v Masterpalm Properties Limited
Heard at: Manchester On: 22, 23 and 24 September 2025
Before: Employment Judge Kenward
Ms J Williamson
Mr S Carter
Appearances
For the Claimant: in person
For the Respondent: Ms J Wilson (Area Manager)
JUDGMENT
1. The complaint of unfair dismissal is well-founded and succeeds. This means
that the Respondent unfairly dismissed the Claimant.
2. The Respondent is ordered to pay to the Claimant compensation for unfair
dismissal in the sum of £8,013.89 comprising of:
(1) a basic award in the sum of £693.00 (on the basis that the conduct of the
Claimant before the dismissal was such that it would be just and equitable to
reduce the sum calculated of £924.00 by 25%);
(2) a compensatory award in the sum of £7,320.89 consisting of a prescribed
element (loss of earnings in respect of the period from 31 July 2023 to 15
February 2024) of £6,752.14, and a non-prescribed element (loss of statutory
rights and pension loss) of £568.75, with these sums having been adjusted from
the sums calculated of £7,828.57 (for the prescribed element) and £659.42 (for
the non-prescribed element) on the basis of being (in the order set out below):
(a) subject to an increase of 15% by reason of the Respondent’s failure to
comply with the ACAS Code of Practice on disciplinary procedures; and
(b) subject to a reduction of 25% as being just and equitable in respect of the
dismissal having been caused or contributed to by any action of the Claimant
3. The complaint of discrimination arising from disability is not well-founded and is
dismissed.
4. The Employment Protection (Recoupment of Benefits) Regulations 1996 apply,
for which purposes the following information is provided:
- 1 -

Case Number: 2412866/2023
Claimant: Mrs J Hoyle
Respondent: Masterpalm Properties Limited
ANNEX TO THE JUDGMENT
(MONETARY AWARDS)
Recoupment of Benefits
The following particulars are given pursuant to the Employment Protection (Recoupment of
Benefits) Regulations 1996.
The Tribunal has awarded compensation to the Claimant, but not all of it should be paid
immediately. This is because the Secretary of State has the right to recover (recoup) any
jobseeker’s allowance, income-related employment and support allowance, universal credit or
income support paid to the Claimant after dismissal. This will be done by way of a Recoupment
Notice, which will be sent to the Respondent usually within 21 days after the Tribunal’s Judgment
was sent to the parties.
The Tribunal’s Judgment states: (1) the total monetary award made to the Claimant; (2) an
amount called the prescribed element, if any; (3) the dates of the period to which the prescribed
element is attributable; and (4) the amount, if any, by which the monetary award exceeds the
prescribed element. Only the prescribed element is affected by the Recoupment Notice and that
part of the Tribunal’s award should not be paid until the Recoupment Notice has been received.
The difference between the monetary award and the prescribed element is payable by the
Respondent to the Claimant immediately.
When the Secretary of State sends the Recoupment Notice, the Respondent must pay the
amount specified in the Recoupment Notice to the Secretary of State. This amount can never
be more than the prescribed element of any monetary award. If the amount is less than the
prescribed element, the Respondent must pay the balance to the Claimant. If the Secretary of
State informs the Respondent that it is not intended to issue a Recoupment Notice, the
Respondent must immediately pay the whole of the prescribed element to the Claimant.
The Claimant will receive a copy of the Recoupment Notice from the Secretary of State. If the
claimant disputes the amount in the Recoupment Notice, the Claimant must inform the Secretary
of State in writing within 21 days. The Tribunal has no power to resolve such disputes, which
must be resolved directly between the Claimant and the Secretary of State.
- 3 -

Case Number: 2412866/2023
GUIDANCE NOTE
1. There is more information about Tribunal judgments here, which you should read
with this guidance note:
www.gov.uk/government/publications/employment-tribunal-hearings-judgment-
guide-t426
If you do not have access to the internet, you can ask for a paper copy by
telephoning the Tribunal office dealing with the claim.
2. The payment of interest on Employment Tribunal awards is governed by The
Employment Tribunals (Interest) Order 1990. Interest is payable on Employment
Tribunal awards if they remain wholly or partly unpaid more than 14 days after
the relevant decision day. Sums in the award that represent costs or expenses
are excluded. Interest starts to accrue from the day immediately after the
relevant decision day, which is called the calculation day.
3. The date of the relevant decision day in your case is set out in the Notice. If the
judgment is paid in full by that date, no interest will be payable. If the judgment is
not paid in full by that date, interest will start to accrue from the next day.
4. Requesting written reasons after you have received a written judgment does not
change the date of the relevant decision day.
5. Interest will be calculated as simple interest accruing from day to day on any part
of the sum of money awarded by the Tribunal that remains unpaid.
6. If the person paying the Tribunal award is required to pay part of it to a public
authority by way of tax or National Insurance, no interest is payable on that part.
7. If the Secretary of State has claimed any part of the sum awarded by the Tribunal
in a recoupment notice, no interest is payable on that part.
8. If the sum awarded is varied, either because the Tribunal reconsiders its own
judgment, or following an appeal to the Employment Appeal Tribunal or a higher
court, interest will still be payable from the calculation day but it will be payable
on the new sum not the sum originally awarded.
9. The online information explains how Employment Tribunal awards are enforced.
The interest element of an award is enforced in the same way.
- 5 -