Case Number: 3301207/2022
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant Respondent
Mrs Nichola Osborn v Mothercare Global Brand Ltd
Heard at: Watford
On: 5,6,7,8,9 (deliberation) 30 August 2024, 28,29 October
2024
Before: Employment Judge Alliott
Members: Ms M Harris
Ms P Barratt
Appearances
For the Claimant: Ms Amanda Marquarite-Robinson (counsel)
For the Respondent: Ms Rachel Barrett (counsel)
RESERVED JUDGMENT
The judgment of the tribunal is that:
1. The claimant was unfairly dismissed.
2. The claimant was discriminated against because she was treated
unfavourably because she was exercising the right to additional maternity
leave.
3. The claimant’s claims for automatically unfair dismissal and sex
discrimination are dismissed.
REASONS
Introduction
1. The claimant was employed by the respondent as a Technical Manager on
12 April 2016. By 2020 she had been promoted to Technical and CSR
manager. Her employment terminated on 3 December 2021. The reason
given by the respondent was redundancy. By a claim form presented on 5
February 2022, following a period of early conciliation from 7 December
1

Case Number: 3301207/2022
2021 to 12 January 2022, the claimant brings complaints of automatically
unfair dismissal, unfair dismissal, maternity discrimination and direct sex
discrimination. The respondent defends the claims.
The issues
2. The issues were agreed and adopted by Employment Judge Tynan at a
CMPH held on 11 October 2022. They are recorded in the case summary
as follows:
“AUTOMATICALLY UNFAIR DISMISSAL / ORDINARY UNFAIR
DISMISSAL
1. Was the reason/principal reason for C's dismissal on 3 December 2021 of a
prescribed kind, namely pregnancy, childbirth or maternity (s99(3)a or
s99(3)b) of the Employment Rights Act 1996 (ERA))? The Respondent
denies this and asserts the Claimant was dismissed for a potentially fair
reason pursuant to section 98(2)(c) of the ERA, namely redundancy.
2. If the Respondent cannot show that the Claimant was dismissed for
redundancy, can the Respondent show that the Claimant was dismissed for
some other substantial reason, namely business reorganisation pursuant to
section 98(1)(b) of the ERA?
3. Was the Claimant’s dismissal fair within the meaning of section 98(4) of
the ERA? In particular, did the Respondent act reasonably in treating that
reason as sufficient for dismissing the Claimant? In considering whether
the Respondent acted reasonably in treating redundancy as sufficient reason
for dismissal, a Tribunal will often consider the issues identified by
Browne-Wilkinson J in Williams v Compair Maxam Ltd [1982] ICR 156:
warning; consultation; pooling; and the search for alternative employment.
4. If the Respondent failed to follow a fair procedure, can the Respondent
show that following a fair procedure would have made no difference to the
decision to dismiss?
Automatic unfair dismissal (regulation 10 of the Maternity & Parental Leave
etc Regulations 1999)
5. The Respondent submits that the Claimant's ordinary and additional
maternity leave period was from 22 May 2020 to 21 May 2021. The
Claimant, however, states that her ordinary and additional maternity leave
period was from 23 May 2020 to 22 May 2021.
a) Is Regulation 10 of the MPLR engaged, given the timing of the
Claimant's redundancy?
b) If so, was it not practicable for the Respondent to continue to employ
the Claimant by reason of redundancy, during this maternity leave
2

Case Number: 3301207/2022
period? The Respondent's case is that the Claimant's redundancy
took place later and after the end of the Claimant's maternity leave
period.
c) If so, was the Head of Technical role a suitable alternative vacancy
which the Claimant was entitled to be offered under a new contract
of employment? The Respondent disagrees as this was a more senior
and higher paid role. The Tribunal will decide:
i. Was the work to be done under it of a kind which was both
suitable in relation to the Claimant and appropriate for the
Claimant to do in the circumstances?
ii. Were its provisions as to the capacity and place in which the
Claimant was to be employed, and as to the other terms and
conditions of her employment, not substantially less
favourable to her than if she had continued to be employed
under the previous contract of employment?
DISCRIMINATION
Maternity discrimination (section 18 of the Equality Act 2010)
6. The Protected Period of the Claimant's pregnancy and maternity started
with her pregnancy (the Claimant is not sure of the exact date her
pregnancy commenced but believes it would have been around mid-
September 2020). The Respondent submits that the Protected Period ended
when her maternity leave ended on 21 May 2021, but the Claimant submits
that her maternity leave ended on 22 May 2021.
7. The unfavourable treatment during the protected period alleged by the
Claimant is that set out at paragraphs 7, 9, 10 (x 2), 13, 14, 15 and 16 of the
Grounds of Complaint:
a) In December 2020, the Claimant avers that when it became apparent
that she would be taking additional maternity leave (this being her
second period of maternity leave since joining the Respondent) and
would likely be off work for the entire year, that was when the
decision was taken to remove her husband as maternity cover and
make changes to her role under the pretext of a general departmental
restructure.
b) Between December 2020 and April 2021, the Claimant alleges that
approximately 30 modifications were made to the structure
document which she was not informed of at any time or how it may
impact her as she was on maternity leave. She claims that she only
discovered this throughout the subsequent redundancy consultation
process. Had she not been on maternity leave, the Claimant avers
that either the restructure would not have been implemented at all or,
3

Case Number: 3301207/2022
if it had, that she would have been involved in the discussions and
her role would not have been deleted.
c) The Claimant avers that the role of Technical, Compliance and CSR
Manager remained on the new structure chart initially, albeit with
parts of the role being carved out and assigned to other newly created
roles under the new proposal. At some point after April 2021, after
Ben Alba went on long-term sick leave, the Claimant avers that the
decision was made to delete the Claimant’s role entirely and create
several new roles, including the Head of Technical role which (she)
was whilst ostensibly more senior than her existing role and at a
higher salary level nevertheless (was) almost identical to it in scope
and which she says she had all necessary skills and experience to
fulfil.
d) During the redundancy consultation process the Claimant avers that
she was informed that hers was the only role which was being
deleted, with a new, more senior position being created at a higher
salary band. Others in the team were to have changes to their roles in
the new structure (which involved expanding their roles) but were
not put at risk nor required to re-apply for their jobs. She claims that
the only role with expanded duties which was put at risk of
redundancy was the Claimant’s role, and she was the only person in
the team who had been on maternity leave.
e) The Claimant avers that she was told she could apply for the newly
created role of Head of Technical (but was not given a job
description or person specification for it until she repeatedly asked
for them), but a second new role was not advertised by the
Respondent and was filled prior to the Claimant being consulted
about her redundancy. She claims that the Respondent did not keep
her job open for her once she commenced her period of additional
maternity leave for a reason connected with her having taken
additional maternity leave and it failed to offer her suitable
alternative employment on her return to work.
8. Did the Respondent treat the Claimant in the manner alleged?
9. If so, was the unfavourable treatment because the Claimant was exercising
or seeking to exercise, or had exercised or sought to exercise, the right to
ordinary or additional maternity leave, contrary to the Equality Act 2010?
10. Is the Respondent able to show a non-discriminatory reason for the
treatment in question?
Sex discrimination
4

Case Number: 3301207/2022
Direct discrimination (section 13 of the Equality Act 2010)
11. The Claimant confirms that she intends to pursue a claim for sex
discrimination despite s18(7) Equality Act (see paragraph 34 of Grounds of
Resistance). The Claimant refers to paragraphs 5, 8, 10, 16 and 17 of the
Grounds of Complaint.
12. Did the Respondent treat the Claimant less favourably than a comparator
was or would have been treated, by:
f) removing her role of Technical & CSR Manager from its Technical
and Sourcing Team structure, which the Claimant believes occurred
between April and July 2021;
g) permitting Chris Beeley to remove the Claimant’s role and/or being
involved in the change/restructuring of her role [while the Claimant
was not involved];
h) permitting Chris Beeley to create a role for himself or creating one
for him;
i) giving the role that was suitable for the Claimant to Chris Beeley
and/or failing to offer it to the Claimant; and
j) the subsequent redundancy.
13. If so, was the less favourable treatment because of / on the grounds of the
Claimant's sex, contrary to the Equality Act 2010?
14. Did any less favourable treatment form a continuing act or ongoing state of
affairs; or, if not, would it be just and equitable for the Tribunal to extend
time for any less favourable treatment that would otherwise be out of
time?”
The law
3. Section 99 Employment Rights Act 1996 (“ERA”) provides as follows:
“99 Leave for family reasons.
(1) An employee who is dismissed shall be regarded for the purposes of
this Part as unfairly dismissed if—
(a) the reason or principal reason for the dismissal is of a prescribed
kind, or
(b) the dismissal takes place in prescribed circumstances.
(2) In this section “ prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations made
by the Secretary of State.”
5

Case Number: 3301207/2022
4. The regulations made by the Secretary of State under s.99 ERA are the
Maternity and Parental Leave etc Regulations 1999 (“MAPLE”). Regulation
20 MAPLE provides, in so far as is relevant, that:
“(1) An employee who is dismissed is entitled under section 99 of the 1996 Act
to be regarded for the purposes of Part X of that Act as unfairly dismissed
if—
(a) the reason or principal reason for the dismissal is of a kind specified
in paragraph (3), or
(b) the reason or principal reason for the dismissal is that the employee
is redundant, and regulation 10 has not been complied with.
…
(3) The kinds of reason referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are reasons
connected with—
(a) the pregnancy of the employee;
(b) the fact that the employee has given birth to a child;
…
(d) the fact that she took, sought to take or availed herself of the benefits
of, ordinary maternity leave or additional maternity leave;
…
(4) Paragraphs (1)(b) and (3)(b) only apply where the dismissal ends the
employee’s ordinary or additional maternity leave period.”
5. The dismissal did not end the claimant’s ordinary or additional maternity
leave period. It must follow therefore that paragraphs (1)(b) and (3)(b) do
not apply.
6. It follows that if the reason or principal reason for the claimant’s dismissal
was a reason connected with her pregnancy or the fact that she took,
sought to take or availed herself of the benefits of, ordinary maternity leave
or additional maternity leave, then she will be regarded as unfairly
dismissed contrary to s.99 ERA.
7. “Connected with” means causally connected with rather than some vaguer,
less stringent connection, Atkins v Coyle Personnel Plc [2008] IRLR 420,
EAT.
Maternity discrimination (s.18 Equality Act 2010)
8. Section 18 of the Equality Act provides as follows:
“18 Pregnancy and maternity discrimination: work cases
6

Case Number: 3301207/2022
(2) A person (A) discriminates against a woman if, in the protected period in
relation to a pregnancy of hers, A treats her unfavourably —
(a) because of the pregnancy, or
(b) because of illness suffered by her as a result of it.
…
(4) A person (A) discriminates against a woman if A treats her unfavourably
because she is exercising or seeking to exercise, or has exercised or sought
to exercise, the right to ordinary or additional maternity leave.
(5) For the purposes of subsection (2), if the treatment of a woman is in
implementation of a decision taken in the protected period, the treatment is
to be regarded as occurring in that period (even if the implementation is not
until after the end of that period).
…
(7) Section 13, so far as relating to sex discrimination does not apply to
treatment of a woman in so far as –
…
(b) It is for a reason mentioned in subsection (3) or (4).”
Burden of proof
9. Section 136 of the Equality Act provides as follows:
“(2) If there are facts from which the court could decide, in the absence of any
other explanation, that a person (A) contravened the provision concerned,
the court must hold that the contravention occurred.
(3) But subsection (2) does not apply if A shows that A did not contravene the
provision.”
Unfair dismissal
10. Section 98 of the ERA provides as follows:
98 General.
(1) In determining for the purposes of this Part whether the dismissal of an
employee is fair or unfair, it is for the employer to show—
(a) the reason (or, if more than one, the principal reason) for the
dismissal, and
(b) that it is either a reason falling within subsection (2) or some other
substantial reason of a kind such as to justify the dismissal of an
employee holding the position which the employee held.
(2) A reason falls within this subsection if it—
7

Case Number: 3301207/2022
…
(c) is that the employee was redundant…
(4) Where the employer has fulfilled the requirements of subsection (1), the
determination of the question whether the dismissal is fair or unfair (having
regard to the reason shown by the employer)—
(a) depends on whether in the circumstances (including the size and
administrative resources of the employer’s undertaking) the
employer acted reasonably or unreasonably in treating it as a
sufficient reason for dismissing the employee, and
(b) shall be determined in accordance with equity and the substantial
merits of the case.”
11. section 139 ERA provides as follows:
“139 Redundancy.
(1) For the purposes of this Act an employee who is dismissed shall be taken to
be dismissed by reason of redundancy if the dismissal is wholly or mainly
attributable to—
(a) the fact that his employer has ceased or intends to cease—
(i) to carry on the business for the purposes of which the
employee was employed by him, or
(ii) to carry on that business in the place where the employee was
so employed, or
(b) the fact that the requirements of that business—
(i) for employees to carry out work of a particular kind, or
(ii) for employees to carry out work of a particular kind in the
place where the employee was employed by the employer,
have ceased or diminished or are expected to cease or diminish.”
The evidence
12. We had a hearing bundle of 394 pages.
13. The claimant provided a chronology and cast list and the respondent
provided a revised list of issues (not agreed) and a note on the law.
14. We had witness statements and heard evidence from:
(i) The claimant
(ii) Ms Rebecca Leuty, HR Business Partner from 30 November 2020
8

Case Number: 3301207/2022
(iii) Mr Christopher Beeley, a freelance consultant until joining the
respondent as Head of Technical in February 2022.
15. In addition, we had a witness statement from Mr Andrew Osborn who was
not called as his evidence was not challenged.
16. Both parties provided us with written closing submissions.
LinkedIn contact
17. Approximately two hours after the conclusion of the hearing on Friday 9
August 2024, non-legal member, Ms Barratt, became aware that both
Mothercare and Mr Chris Beeley had observed her on LinkedIn and her
credentials had been looked at. Mr Beeley tried to connect on LinkedIn as
Ms Barratt received a “I want to connect” message.
18. Ms Barratt did not respond.
19. This information is disclosed so that all parties are aware of it.
20. We record that we have totally disregarded this contact.
The facts
21. The claimant was employed on 12 April 2016 as Technical Manager in the
Technology Department at Grade M2.
22. The respondent has a maternity policy. This provides:
“C During your maternity leave
…
Keeping informed
Your line manager will ensure you are kept informed of any important changes in
the workplace, which may directly affect you on your return to work. Before you
go on leave, discuss with them how best to contact you.”
And
“D Returning to work
…
At the end of ordinary maternity leave (ie weeks 1 to 26), you will be able to
return to your original job with the same terms and conditions of employment you
held before taking maternity leave.
At the end of additional maternity leave (ie weeks 27 to 52) and if it is not
reasonably practicable for you to return to the same job, we will find you a
suitable alternative role with the same grade and on terms and conditions which
are no less favourable than the original job.”
23. In 2017 the claimant took 12 months maternity leave. The claimant’s role
was advertised externally and maternity cover was brought in for a year.
9

Case Number: 3301207/2022
The claimant told us that during this first period of maternity leave she had
regular contact with her line management and was also told of activity in the
office.
24. In January 2019 the claimant’s job title was changed to Technical & CSR
manager at Grade M2. Whilst the claimant’s grade remained the same, she
took on extra duties which included line managing a team of six and taking
on CSR responsibility.
25. The claimant became pregnant around August/September 2019.
26. The claimant’s Mat B1 form dated 20 February 2020 gave a due date in the
week commencing 24 May 2020.
27. The maternity leave and benefits letter dated 29 April 2020 sets out that the
claimant’s maternity leave was from 23 May 2020 until 22 May 2021. The
respondent later asserted that the maternity leave was from 22 May 2020
until 21 May 2021. In our judgment, nothing material turns on the
difference.
28. The claimant’s baby was actually born on 6 May 2020. No adjustment to
her maternity leave was made however due to the fact that the claimant
went on annual leave on 1 May 2020.
29. In November 2019 Mothercare UK went into administration. The franchise
arm of the business remained and was renamed Mothercare Global Brand,
the respondent. The claimant remained employed by the respondent and
she was given a new line manager who became Director of Sourcing, Mr
Ben Alba.
30. When the claimant informed Ben Alba that she was pregnant she made
enquiries as to whether she should look for maternity cover. Ben Alba
believed maternity cover would not be necessary as he could support the
team. We do not find that this was anything other than a legitimate
business decision. We do not find that this evidenced a decision that the
respondent was not interested in maintaining the claimant’s role.
31. In February 2020, with the covid virus becoming more prevalent, the
claimant began working from home.
32. The respondent’s business went in to full lockdown with the country in
March 2020.
33. As the weeks went by it became clear that maternity cover would be
required for technical issues. The claimant was asked if her husband, a
consultant, would be interested in a contract as an Interim Technical
Manager. The claimant’s husband is Mr Andrew Osborn. Andrew Osborn
was offered the role on 23 April 2020, accepted it on 24 April 2020 and
began on 27 April 2020. Initially his engagement was for three months. On
23 July 2020 Ben Alba confirmed that the contract would be extended by
another three months to 27 October 2020.
10

Case Number: 3301207/2022
34. In September 2020 Ms Karen Tyler joined the respondent as Chief Product
Officer, becoming Ben Alba’s line manager and replacing him as Head of
Product. Ms Rebecca Leuty states that a key reason for her recruitment
was to drive product development and increase profitability, albeit that that
is her understanding as she was not with the respondent at that point.
35. Mr Chris Beeley was a Technical Director at a children’s/nursery retailer
called Mammas & Pappas where he worked for 18 years. During that time
he met Karen Tyler who also worked for Mammas and Pappas.
36. The unchallenged evidence of Andrew Osborn is that towards the end of his
second three months (late October 2020) he had a ‘Teams’ meeting with
Ben Alba and was informed that the respondent would not be further
extending his contract.
37. Shortly before 9 November 2020, Chris Beeley started his own consultancy.
Soon after he announced his consultancy he was contacted by Karen Tyler.
The respondent and Chris Beeley entered into a three month consultancy
agreement and Chris Beeley began working for the respondent as of 9
November 2020. We have not been provided with a copy of the
consultancy agreement and so have not seen it.
38. Chris Beeley’s evidence was that he was brought in to support strategic
projects with the Chief Operating Officer, Mr Kevin Rusling. The specific
projects he initially worked on were:
“ (i) Drafting a new Manufacturing Partner Agreement to be put in place with
each of our manufacturing partners
(ii) Advising the board on how we could have representation in the Far East
without opening an office there, and implementing that plan;
(iii) Project Evolve, direct shipment to our franchise partners from our
manufacturing partners.”
39. (ii) and (iii) would involve working with Ben Alba and the Technical
Department. Chris Beeley states that he did not undertake the day to day
work of the claimant.
40. We find that Karen Tyler clearly had a high regard for Chris Beeley. In our
judgment, a new-in-post Chief Product Officer is very unlikely to bring in an
individual to work with her Chief Operating Officer unless she had full
confidence in his abilities.
41. We have not heard from Karen Tyler. No contemporary documentation
concerning Chris Beeley’s recruitment has been placed before us. We find
that the termination of Andrew Osborn’s engagement and the engagement
of Chris Beeley are connected.
42. The unchallenged evidence of Andrew Osborn is that Ben Alba told him that
the explanation for the non-extension of his contract was nothing to do with
11

Case Number: 3301207/2022
his performance and that it was the business reviewing its contractor
costs/policies.
43. Becky Leuty suggested that this was Ben Alba being tactful and that the real
reason was dissatisfaction with Andrew Osborn’s performance. She told us
she understood there were emails to this effect. Her information came from
Ben Alba and is hearsay. No emails have been produced to us which could
easily have been done. We do not accept this evidence as it is
uncorroborated hearsay and contradicts what Andrew Osborn says he was
told.
44. We find that in all probability Karen Tyler decided to dispense with Andrew
Osborn as she was going to bring in Chris Beeley to cover, to an extent, the
working of the Technical Department and to assist Ben Alba. Chris Beeley
was clearly capable of covering the claimant’s role as, later, he was
engaged on a fixed term contract on 1 May. We have an email dated 26
April 2021 from Lauri Giambrone, Head of People at the time, to the
claimant which states:
“I am writing to let you know that Ben will be out of the office for at least the
next two weeks and will be uncontactable during that time as he will be
undergoing urgent surgery.
In order to ensure ongoing support to the team, we have engaged Chris Beeley on
a fixed term contract to cover the Technical & CSR Manager role until you return
to the business following your maternity leave He will also cover elements of the
Sourcing Director role in the short term until Ben has fully recovered.”
45. Given that Lauri Giambrone was Head of HR, we find that she was likely to
know the position and this is likely to be accurate.
46. We do not find that the termination of Andrew Osborn’s engagement was
connected to or because it became apparent that the claimant was taking
additional maternity leave. We find that it was because Chris Beeley had
been engaged.
47. Andrew Osborn’s contract was extended by four weeks “to tidy any loose
ends” which covered the start of Chris Beeley’s engagement.
48. Chris Beeley’s consultancy agreement was extended on 1 February 2021
for another three months.
49. This case principally concerns the reorganisation of the Technical Team and
the assertion that the claimant’s role became redundant. In this context we
have serious concerns that we have heard no evidence from Karen Tyler or
Ben Alba, the principal architects of the reorganisation and the alleged
redundancy situation. The fact that Karen Tyler has left the organisation did
not present an insurmountable obstacle to her giving evidence. We
understand Ben Alba has a health condition. Even in the absence of those
two individuals giving oral evidence, we would have expected this process
to be heavily documented and very little has been placed before us.
12

Case Number: 3301207/2022
50. In the circumstances we have looked at such information as we have to try
and discern how the reorganisation/redundancy process came about.
51. As we have already found, Karen Tyler joined the respondent in September
2020 and on 9 November 2020 she brought in Chris Beeley.
52. Chris Beeley gave evidence that he “was aware of the proposal to reshape
the Technical Team to make it fit for purpose, and worked closely with Ben
Alba on devising a suitable structure for the team.”
53. We have a document described in the index as “Global Sourcing CSR
Technical Org Meta Data”. This refers to a four slide document titled
“Global Sourcing and Technical” and shows that the document was created
on 18 December 2020 by Chris Beeley. Given that it is unlikely that Chris
Beeley created that document in a vacuum, it is clear to us and we find that
earlier in December 2020 discussions were probably taking place as to how
the Sourcing Technical Department could be reorganised. We have been
provided with various organisation charts for the Technology, Compliance
and CSR Departments. The first one that has been provided to us is dated
January 2021. This has the claimant’s role described as follows:-
“Andrew Osborn
Interim Technical & CSR Manager (M2)
Nicky Osborn, Mat Leave April 2020”
54. Reference to Andrew Osborn could suggest that these proposals were
being discussed prior to his departure at the end of November 2020.
55. The proposed structure from January 2021 retained the claimant’s position
at M2 but with a job title of “Technical Manager”. A Mr Jon Manzi held the
role of Packing Manager in the Brands Team. The proposed structure was
to transfer Jon Manzi to the Technology Compliance and CSR Department
with a job title “Sourcing & Manufacturing CSR Manager”. We note that the
CSR aspect to the claimant’s job title appears to have been transferred to
Jon Manzi. Chris Beeley put it as follows:-
“In addition, under changes previously introduced by Ben, the Packing Manager
role held by Jon Manzi had been expanded slightly to ensure he was fully utilised.
Jon already administered the onboarding of new manufacturing partners, so it
seemed sensible to train him on the complexities regarding the agreements with
manufacturers which Ben had previously had to pick up, as there was no one else
in the team who could do this work.”
56. Whilst the respondent sought to play down the extent of Jon Manzi’s CSR
responsibilities, we find that aspects of the claimant’s role were being
moved to Jon Manzi.
57. In February 2021, a Ms Emma Pearce was interviewed for the vacant role of
Fabric & Garment Technology Lead at Grade M1. She was appointed to
13

Case Number: 3301207/2022
the position and, having to serve three month’s notice at her existing
employer, began work for the respondent on 10 May 2021.
58. The proposed new organisational chart went through various iterations. The
final one still has Jon Manzi described as “Sourcing & Manufacturing CSR
Manager M2” and he had reporting to him two A2 positions who, from the
organisational chart in January 2021, used to report to he claimant.
59. We have been provided with job descriptions for the claimant and Jon
Manzi’s roles which we have not found particularly helpful. The claimant
estimates that two thirds of her role had been allocated to others whereas
the respondent contends that it was far less. Doing the best we can, we find
that a significant part of the claimant’s role was removed and allocated to
others during this period. In support of this conclusion we note that two of
the three justifications for the claimant’s redundancy were that a Technology
Lead would be created and the packaging role was to include manufacturing
partner management and CSR. We note that Emma Pearce currently
holds the Lead Technical role.
60. In April 2021 Ben Alba unfortunately was out of the office due to a condition
that may have needed to involve surgery.
61. Ben Alba was the Sourcing Technical and Ethical Director at Grade M4. It
was not usual to have a Director heading up a department and most
departments were headed up by M3 grades. It was the claimant’s evidence
that her technical expertise was greater than Mr Alba’s and she often
briefed him on those issues.
62. Throughout April/May 2021 the claimant completed her “Keep in Touch”
(KIT) days.
63. The claimant’s maternity leave ended on 22 May and the claimant took
annual leave until returning to work on 29 June, albeit working remotely.
The office had changed location and the claimant did not have a pass or
parking space.
64. We have looked in detail at what information we have concerning the
decision to make the claimant’s role redundant. Given that we have not
heard from Karen Tyler or Ben Alba, the first indication comes from the
witness statement of Chris Beeley. He states:-
“I was aware of the proposal to reshape the Technical Team to make it fit for
purpose, and worked closely with Ben Alba on devising a suitable structure for
the team. However, it was Karen Tyler who then sponsored those proposals,
obtaining operating board approval to proceed and then informing the claimant of
the proposal at the end of July 2021.”
65. Later in his witness statement he says:-
“In July 2021, after Ben had had his surgery and it was unclear how long he
would be absent, Karen asked me for some advice about the structure of the
Technical Team.”
14

Case Number: 3301207/2022
66. Notwithstanding those comments, we have been provided with no
contemporaneous emails or other documentation dealing with how it was
that the decision to make the claimant’s role redundant was arrived at. We
find this extraordinary. In our judgment, it is inconceivable that there would
not have been email exchanges between Karen Tyler, Ben Alba and Chris
Beeley, not least since Ben Alba was off sick and only working occasionally
remotely and Chris Beeley was also predominantly remotely working. The
reference to Karen Tyler obtaining operating board approval suggests to us
that there must have been some sort of management document dealing with
the issue.
67. Chris Beeley goes on to state:-
“I was invited to a call via WhatsApp on 21 July 2021 with Ben, and Lauri and
Becky from HR. We discussed at this meeting Karen’s proposal to remove the
Technical manager role.”
68. We have been shown an email dated 21 July 2021. This is from Lauri
Giambrone, Head of People, to Becky Leuty, Interim HR Business Partner,
and Chris Beeley. The email is headed “Tech Team catchup” and states:-
“Hi both
Can you be available for a call on WhatsApp with Ben – to discuss structure.
Thanks.
L”
69. It is noticeable that Karen Tyler is not part of that discussion. Becky Leuty
states in her witness statement:-
“The first I was told about a potential review and restructure of the Technical
Team was 21 July 2021… Then on 21 July I had a 121 meeting with my manager
Lauri Giambrone and she informed me I would be required to assist the business
with a further restructuring proposal relating to the Technical Team… I was
invited to a meeting with Lauri, Chris Beeley and Ben Alba to discuss this. Ben
was on sickness leave at the time, but despite his leave, was involved with work
and was continuing to answer emails and take part in discussions. We held the
call via WhatsApp to accommodate Ben in particular. On 21 July having
discussed the plan I started preparing documents and planning time into Karen
Tyler’s diary for the relevant consultation meetings.”
70. Once again, we find it extraordinary that the respondent has not disclosed
any contemporaneous documentation leading up to that meeting on
WhatsApp on 21 July 2021. We find it inconceivable that there would not
have been email exchanges between Karen Tyler and Chris Beeley
concerning this alleged restructure.
71. The WhatsApp meeting was scheduled to begin at 15.00. It cannot have
lasted very long because at 15.21 Becky Leuty emailed Karen Tyler
suggesting dates for a meeting with the claimant to tell her that her role was
removed.
15

Case Number: 3301207/2022
72. On 22 July, the claimant emailed Karen Tyler requesting an introductory
meeting because she had never met her. Karen Tyler had been on leave
for the first two weeks following the claimant’s return to work.
73. As the claimant had requested a meeting, so it was decided to use that
meeting to inform the claimant that her role was redundant.
74. On 23 July 2021, the claimant had a Teams meeting with Karen Tyler. She
states-
“Before I could introduce myself Karen told me that the business was making
changes and my role had been put at risk of redundancy. I was completely
blindsided by this news, I obviously found this very upsetting, and the call ended
with Karen telling me that she would be inviting me to a consultation meeting,
and I would receive a letter and invite.”
75. We have a letter dated 23 July 2021 from Karen Tyler to the claimant but
signed on behalf of Karen Tyler by Becky Leuty. This states:-
“Re: Invite to individual consultation meeting
I am writing to invite you to an individual consultation meeting in relation to the
proposed removal of the role of Technical & CSR manager.
The administration of Mothercare UK, in November 2019, significantly changed
the landscape of the business and since then, we have continued to transform the
way we work to accommodate both the commercial imperatives and ongoing
operational needs of Mothercare Global brands; making the business leaner and
less complex. Accordingly, we have continued to review our structure in the
context of costs and the capability needed to successfully deliver our goals.
In order to create a narrower focus and clarity in accountability, we are proposing
a clearer delineation between product technology, product compliance/franchise
partner support and future manufacturer relationship. Therefore unfortunately,
the role of Technical & CSR Manager is at risk of redundancy.”
76. The claimant was invited to an individual consultation meeting on 29 July.
77. In preparation for the meeting on 29 July Becky Leuty wrote a script for
Karen Tyler. This states:-
“I wanted to have a chat with you about your role and a transformation piece we
are now about to start. The administration of Mothercare UK back in November
2019 significantly changed the landscape of the business and since then, we have
continued to transform the way we work to accommodate both the commercial
imperatives and ongoing operational needs of Mothercare Global; making the
business leaner and less complex.
Accordingly, we have continued to review our structure in the context of costs
and the capability needed to successfully deliver our goals.
16

Case Number: 3301207/2022
Therefore unfortunately, the role of Technical & CSR manager is at risk of
redundancy.
…
Potential questions
Question: How could you do this straight after maternity leave?
A: Unfortunately, there is never a good time to start a process like this,
however your maternity leave has not been a factor. It has become
apparent recently that Ben is going to be off longer than we
originally anticipated and this has pushed us into looking at the
structure of the team to ensure the best performance is still achieved.
However, if you have more questions on timing then we can discuss
at your first consultation meeting.
Q: Has Chris Beeley been brought in to take my job?
No, Chris has great historical experience and has done senior roles
for other key brands so he has not been operating at your current
level. He has been covering Ben’s role which reflects the level he is
operating at. If you have more questions about Chris’ role, we can
discuss at the first consultation meeting.
Q: What is happening with the structure/what will replace my role and
can I apply for a new role?
A: Yes, in order to create a narrower focus and clarity in accountability,
we are proposing a clearer delineation between product technology,
product compliance/franchise partner support and manufacturer
relationship. We are therefore proposing the following changes:
• Creation of a M3 Head of Technical role with focus on strategic
accountability linked to wider business strategy; accountability
for delivering to our three year business plan (product types,
origins and sales channels). Transforming our technical model in
partnership resourcing to enable our future ambitions.
• Creation of a Technology Lead to focus operational delivery and
new product development.
• Expansion of the Packing Manager role to include partner
management and CSR.”
78. From the questions, it is clear to us that Becky Leuty was alive to the fact
that the claimant was being made redundant shortly after effectively
returning from maternity leave. The question concerning Chris Beeley is, in
our judgment, curious. Why should Becky Leuty be anticipating such a
question in circumstances where it is the respondent’s case that Chris
Beeley had not been covering her job (the email referenced in paragraph 44
is said by the respondent to be erroneous) and was undertaking far more
senior strategic activity. In our judgment, this could indicate that there had
been discussions about Chris Beeley taking over her role.
17

Case Number: 3301207/2022
79. In due course, some slides were prepared for the meeting on 29 July. The
first slide we have quotes verbatim two of the paragraphs from the script.
When asked about those paragraphs Becky Leuty told us that she assumed
the wording had come from Karen Tyler. She said she assumed it had been
given to her after 21 July. She told us it was either in an email or that Karen
Tyler called her and she typed as Karen Tyler spoke. Once again, we find it
extraordinary that there is no documentary trail concerning this wording.
80. The first consultation meeting took place on 29 July 2021. It was conducted
by Karen Tyler with Becky Leuty as the notetaker. We have the
respondent’s notes of the meeting as well as a transcript of the meeting due
to the fact that the claimant recorded it covertly. The new proposed
structure chart presented at the meeting is virtually identical to one that had
been created in March 2021. The only material difference is that the
claimant’s role of Technical Manager M2 was now described as Head of
Technical M3. We note that the Sourcing & Technical Director role (Ben
Alba’s) remains on that chart. The meeting lasted from 14.00 until 14.27.
Karen Tyler set out that two new roles were to be created, namely Head of
Technical M3 and technology Lead and that the Sourcing Packaging and
Manufacturing Manager’s role had been expanded. The claimant was told
that in terms of redeployment she would have an opportunity to look at
alternative roles within the organisation.
81. The claimant was invited to a second consultation meeting on 24 August
2021. Once again, the claimant covertly recorded this meeting and so we
have a full transcript, Once again, the meeting was short, lasting from
11.00 until 11.26. The claimant had clearly consulted a solicitor as she read
out a statement which includes the following:-
“Chris was then brought in to the business as a Contractor and I was told in
writing by HR on April 2020 that he was my maternity cover. He is also
seemingly covering for my boss who is on long term sick leave but as I’ve been
told he is not my boss and therefore I don’t report to him, it is evidently the case
that he is in fact my maternity cover albeit he is also now covering for Ben who is
off sick. Chris is the person who has drafted the proposed restructure and the
company has evidently decided to eliminate my role to enable him to retain, to be
retained in the business.”
82. Later in the transcript of this meeting, Karen Tyler is recorded as saying:-
“Karen Tyler: So we have looked at where we believe we need the skill set for
the future growth and transformation of the business. What that
then meant was we looked at the role that you currently have
which is the Technical and CSR manager and we looked at the
skill set needed within the team to lead and spearhead that
growth. That therefore created the potential of us having an M3
role which is a broader more senior role which is Head of
Technical. So when we talk about you mentioned cost, when we
talk about leaner this we didn’t approach from the point of view
of looking at the cost, we looked at the structure, we looked at the
needs of the business and then we said what is the best way to run
our business, so this is not just about this role and a cost, we
18

Case Number: 3301207/2022
didn’t approach it in that way, we looked at what we needed as a
structure and therefore how we can run you know we talk about
being an asset light business, we talk about being a lean business,
that is not about cost cutting, that is about making sure we’ve got
the right structure for the growth of the business. Ben was here in
the business at the time before he was poorly and he was the one
that worked with me on the structure of the team.
Claimant: So Ben’s put this structure together?
Karen Tyler: Ben and with myself have looked at the structure. Now obviously
he has got experience across the Technical Team and he’s got
experience across sourcing and he’s got experience across
product because he headed up all of the products, so he had a very
rounded view.
Claimant: Well that interesting.
Karen Tyler: Because you were on maternity leave and because Chris Beeley
had been brought into the business as a fixed term contract with
Chris’ experience Ben will have used his input I would imagine to
actually be able to then think about the structure itself, so Ben and
I, so he will have used Chris Beeley’s input but Ben and I were
the ones who formally then pulled the structure together.”
83. We note from this extract that at that time there was no suggestion that Ben
Alba’s role was going to be extinguished. Whilst Ben Alba had been of sick
since April, it is clear that he had been working remotely on occasions. We
have noted from the respondent’s closing submission that the redundancy
situation advanced on behalf of the respondent is very much on the basis
that Ben Alba’s position at M4 and the claimant’s at M2 were both to be
abolished and a single M3 Head of Technical created. This appears in the
respondent’s closing submissions as follows:-
At 40:-
“The claimant’s role was redundant because the requirements of the respondent’s
business for employees to carry out work of the particular kind done by the
claimant were expected to diminish (section 139 ERA). This was because the
team management formally undertaken by both the claimant (“hands on” as she
put it) and Ben Alba (strategic) were to be restructured under a single grade M3
Head of Technical. Whereas previously the respondent required two employees
to discharge different aspects of management functions, in future it would require
one. This was a classic redundancy situation.”
And at 47(b):-
“As noted above, there was an obvious business efficiency in creating a role for a
single grade M3 Head of Department, instead of retaining an M2 Manager (the
claimant) and an M4 Director (Ben Alba).”
We reject this analysis. Ben Alba was involved in making the ‘restructure’
and his role was not to be extinguished at that time. The M4 role being
made redundant only emerged much later.
19

Case Number: 3301207/2022
84. At the end of the second consultation meeting the claimant requested the
job description for the Head of Technical and was sent it in due course.
85. We have an email dated 3 September 2021 from Karen Tyler to the
claimant. This reiterates Karen Tyler’s position as follows:-
“The process relating to pulling together the new structure, involved myself and
Ben Alba assessing if we currently have a structure that will help us move into the
next phase of the business for Mothercare. We looked at all current roles within
the Technical and Sourcing Team and what skill sets were needed to spearhead
and lead this growth. It became clear that a senior and broader role, an M3 Head
of Technical, was needed to define the global technical strategy of MGB and
ensure that it meets the global strategy of the business among other duties which
are listed on the job description you were provided. The current duties of the
Technical and CSR manager role are not at this level and as mentioned to you in
the second consultation meeting, we did not approach this as a point of costs, we
looked at the structure and needs of the business.
The process for defining the Technology Lead role has not begun yet and will be
done in conjunction with the postholder of the M3 Head of Technical. As
mentioned previously, please do let me know if you wish to apply for the M3
Head of Technical role.”
86. On 8 September 2021, the claimant lodged a grievance by way of response
to Karen Tyler’s email. The grievance included an allegation that a failure to
offer the claimant an alternative role was a clear act of maternity
discrimination.
87. On 8 November 2021, a third consultation meeting was held that was also in
connection with the claimant’s grievance. Both sides effectively reiterated
their position. The following is recorded:-
“Susanne Bailey: …You talked about that there are some differences between
your role and this new role, is that right?
Claimant: Well the job descriptions are almost identical, there are a few
additional pieces of wording in there, that talk about strategy
and strategic budgeting I think it is, those are really the only
differences that I can see from the role that I am currently
doing to the new proposed M3 role.
Susanne Bailey: Yeah and on this role you haven’t applied for that role, no?
Claimant: No because part of this grievance hearing is to find out why I
need to apply for it because I should have already been
considered for it so I can’t until the outcome of this grievance
I am unable to apply for it.”
88. A fourth consultation meeting took place on 24 November 2021. This was
again conducted by Susanne Bailey. Again familiar issues were discussed.
The claimant was told that if she wanted to apply for the Head of Technical
role she had until Monday 29 November 2021 to apply for it.
20

Case Number: 3301207/2022
89. The claimant was invited to a final consultation meeting on 29 November
2021 but responded in an email which concluded:-
“I therefore see no way whatsoever in which I can either continue working for
Mothercare or in which my termination can be deemed anything other than unfair
and discriminatory.”
90. Becky Leuty stated in her witness statement:-
“We took this to mean that the consultation had been exhausted and she was not
expressing interest in the Head of Technical post. As such, the final consultation
meeting did not take place on 29 November 2021.”
91. On 3 December 2021, Susanne Bailey wrote to the claimant “Re: Outcome
to redundancy consultation process and grievance complaint.” The letter
states:-
“I am writing to confirm the outcome of the redundancy consultation process for
the role of Technical & CSR Manager. In summary, I confirm that role is
redundant. You have declined to apply for the vacancy of M3 Head of Technical,
despite the application deadline being extended at your request. As you know, the
company has explored ways in which your redundancy could be avoided, and the
possibility of alternative employment. Unfortunately, it has not been able to
identify any suitable alternative employment for you or any way in which your
redundancy could be avoided.”
92. The letter concludes:-
“As we have not been able to find a way to mitigate the Technical & CSR
Manager role from being made redundant and as you have not applied for the
Head of Technical role by the specified date, then I can confirm that regrettably,
your employment with the company is terminated by reason of redundancy with
effect from today’s date 3 December 2021.”
93. Becky Leuty states in her witness statement that it was considered that
there was no longer a need for Ben Alba’s role alongside the new M3 Head
of Technical. She states that there was a proposal to put Ben at risk of
redundancy at the same time as Nikki. We reject that evidence as it is
inconsistent with the evidence that Ben Alba was involved with Karen Tyler
in the creation of the new M3 role. It only emerged much later, towards the
end of 2021.
94. At some time later in 2021, Ben Alba was placed at risk of redundancy.
There was a consultation period (the dates of which we are unaware) and
Ben Alba was made redundant on 10 December 2021. He worked his
notice period until June 2022.
95. On 20 December 2021, the respondent advertised the Head of Technical
role. Karen Tyler conducted the interviews, Chris Beeley applied and was
successful. He was appointed Head of Technical on 18 February 2022.
Conclusions
21

Case Number: 3301207/2022
96. We find that Karen Tyler had a high regard for Chris Beeley and wanted to
bring him into the organisation.
97. We find that, at a time when the claimant was on maternity leave, probably
in November/December 2020, Karen Tyler decided she wanted to replace
the claimant with Chris Beeley. We find this having considered all that
happened thereafter and the fact that on 18 February 2022 Chris Beeley
was appointed M3 Head of Technical. We find it particularly illuminating
that the script prepared by Becky Leuty for Karen Tyler in advance of the
meeting on 29 July 2021 to tell her that she was redundant included an
answer to the question “Has Chris Beeley been brought in to take my job?”.
We find that anticipating such a question would be unlikely if, as maintained
by the respondent, Chris Beeley had not been covering the claimant’s job
whilst she was on maternity leave. We find that Chris Beeley was covering
(at least in part) the claimant’s job while she was on maternity leave as well
as covering aspects of Ben Alba’s job and other projects. Becky Leuty and,
we suspect Karen Tyler, were both acutely aware that the claimant was
being informed she was redundant within a month of her effective return
from maternity leave and that they were proposing to place Chris Beeley
into her role.
98. We find that Karen Tyler, probably in conjunction with Chris Beeley, then set
about managing the claimant out of the business.
99. We find that the reorganisation that began in December 2020 and ran
through to the end of the financial year in April 2021 was in order to
structure the Technical department so that the claimant’s role could be
presented as disappearing. Parts of her role were given to others,
principally CSR to Jon Manzi and the new Technology Lead post created
and recruited with Emma Pearce. However, fundamentally Chris Beeley
was to replace the claimant and do her job. In order to present this as a
redundancy the respondent had to present the new Head of Technical as a
different role. The grading at M3 was to pay Chris Beeley more. The
strategic aspect was, we find, cosmetic in that it would duplicate Ben Alba’s
role.
100. We find that the fact that the claimant’s role remained on the organisation
charts (albeit with CSR removed) was because she was on maternity leave
and the respondent did not want to suggest that her role was disappearing
during the protected period. The respondent had to keep her position for
her to return to or offer her a suitable alternative. Nevertheless we find that
the respondent had decided to dispense with the claimant and was waiting
for her maternity leave to come to an end before doing so. We find that the
speed with which the claimant was told her position was redundant after
returning from maternity leave (and holiday) supports this.
101. We find that there was nothing that occurred between the end of the
claimant’s maternity leave and 29 July 2021 that changed the position and
suddenly caused the respondent to decide to make her M2 role redundant.
We accept that Ben Alba remained off sick and the longer he was off sick
the more it posed questions as to whether he would ever return. However,
22

Case Number: 3301207/2022
we do not find that this caused a change for the respondent at that time.
Ben Alba was, according to the respondent, involved in discussing the
restructure and there was no explanation at any stage that the rationale
behind the extinguishing of the M2 role was that the M4 role would also go,
leading to a costs saving.
102. We find that there was no genuine redundancy situation. We find there was
no cessation or diminishment in the requirement of the business for the
claimant’s work to be undertaken. Whilst it may have become more
apparent during the course of 2021 that Ben Alba would not return, this only
probably became apparent late in 2021. As such, any reorganisation
contemplated in late 2020 and up to at least August 2021 expressly retained
Ben Alba as M4 Resource & Technical Director. In that position he was
responsible for strategic issues. As such, the M3 Head of Technical would
be doing the claimant’s job as any expertise on a strategic level would be
duplicating Ben Alba’s role.
103. As we have found there was no genuine redundancy situation, so we find
that regulation 10 MAPLE is not engaged.
104. Nevertheless, in the event that there was a genuine redundancy situation,
we find that this arose during the claimant’s maternity leave. The transfer
of certain parts of the claimant’s role had taken place by 10 May 2021 (CSR
transfer and Emma Pearce’s engagement). The decision to remove her role
had been taken. We have considered the wording of Regulation 10(1),
namely:
“Where during an employee’s ordinary or additional maternity leave period, it is
not practicable by reason of redundancy for her employer to continue to employ
her under her existing contract of employment.”
105. We have considered whether it is sufficient for a decision to have been
made, as we find was the position here, in order to trigger the obligation to
offer suitable alternative employment or whether it is necessary for the
claimant to be informed or put on notice of risk of redundancy or the
redundancy situation to be announced first. We have taken account of the
case of Sefton Borough Council v Wainwright UKEAT/0168/14/LA which
decided that it was open to the Employment Tribunal to conclude that there
was a redundancy when the council decided that two positions would be
replaced by one (IDS: Maternity and Parental Rights at 4.68). Further, we
have noted the observations of HH Judge Eady QC in Sefton at 43:-
“If it is also left to the employer to decide when a redundancy actually occurs –
so, to determine when the obligation under Regulation 10
arises - it is easy to see how that position might be abused.”
106. We find that the redundancy situation did arise during the claimant’s
protected period as a decision had been made that it was not practicable by
reason of redundancy for the respondent to continue to employ her. We
find that the process was delayed until after the claimant returned from
maternity leave in order to avoid the Regulation 10 obligation.
23

Case Number: 3301207/2022
107. We find that the position of Head of Technical was a suitable alternative role
for the claimant to be offered. We reject the respondent’s contention that it
was not suitable. We find that it was created by and for Chris Beeley.
Indeed, in a first draft he graded it M2 and it was only later changed to M3.
M3 obviously has a higher salary but that was the respondent’s choice, no
doubt in order to make it attractive to Chris Beeley. We find that the role
was essentially the same as the claimant’s existing role and that the
“strategic element” has been overplayed by the respondent. We find that
the work to be done was of a kind which was both suitable in relation to the
claimant and appropriate for her to do in the circumstances. Further, we
find that the provisions as to capacity and place and as to the other terms of
her employment were not less favourable to her than if she had continued in
her previous role. We note the comments in the IDS Handbook at 4.73:-
“The question may also arise as to whether, if there is a suitable and appropriate
vacancy, the employer is obliged to offer it to the employee under Regulation 10
even if this involves offering it at a higher salary or on better terms and conditions
than it would otherwise have supported. Assuming the content of an available
role is suitable and appropriate, we suggest that the wording of Regulation 10
implies that it should be offered to the employee even if this means the terms and
conditions need to be bettered in order to ensure that the new contract is ‘not
substantially less favourable’ than the old.”
108. Consequently, we find that if there was a genuine redundancy situation it
arose during the claimant’s protected period, Regulation 10 was engaged
and she should have been offered the Head of Technical role.
109. However, we find that there would not have been an automatically unfair
dismissal for failure to comply with Regulation 10 as the claimant’s dismissal
did not end her maternity leave period.
110. Accordingly, the automatically unfair dismissal claim as set out in the list of
issues is dismissed.
111. We find that the decision to remove the claimant’s husband as maternity
cover was unfavourable treatment. We find it was not causally linked with
the claimant taking additional maternity leave. We find it was because Chris
Beeley had been engaged.
112. We find that the decision to make changes to the claimant’s role under the
pretext of a general departmental restructure was unfavourable treatment
and was to implement the decision to replace the claimant with Chris
Beeley. To that extent, the treatment alleged in issue 7(a) is proved.
113. As regards issues 7(b) - (e) our findings are as follows:
114. 7(b): Between December 2020 and April 2021 a number of changes were
made to the structure document and the claimant was not informed at this
time how it would impact her and that this was while she was on maternity
leave. We make no finding as to what may have happened had she not
been on maternity leave as this is speculation and not treatment. To that
extent treatment 7(b) is proved.
24

Case Number: 3301207/2022
115. 7(c): We find that although the claimant’s role remained on the structure
chart initially the decision to replace her with Chris Beeley had been taken in
December 2020/early 2021 and not after April 2021. We have found that
the role of Head of Technical was essentially identical to the claimant’s role
and that it was suitable for her. To that extent treatment 7(c) is proved.
116. 7(d): Treatment 7(d) is factually proved save that the claimant’s role did not
involve expanded duties.
117. 7(e): We find that the claimant was told she could apply for the role of Head
of Technical and was given a job description after requesting one. We find
that the other role referenced was the Technology Lead role filled by Emma
Pearce in January 2021 with her start date of 10 May 2021. That was a
Grade M1 role and not a suitable alternative role for the claimant. We find
that the respondent did not keep the claimant’s job open for her when she
returned from maternity leave and did not offer a suitable alternative role
either pursuant to Regulation 10 MAPLE or indeed pursuant to Regulation
18 MAPLE. To that extent treatment 7(e) is proved.
118. We find that the treatment found proved in 7(a),(b),(c) and (e) (as regards
not offering alternative employment ) was unfavourable treatment.
119. We find that the treatment was whilst she was exercising the right to
additional maternity leave. We have found the alleged redundancy situation
was a sham. We find that those are facts from which the court could
decide, in the absence of any other explanation, that the respondent
contravened section 18 of the Equality Act by treating the claimant
unfavourably because she was exercising the right to additional maternity
leave. We find that the respondent has not shown that it did not contravene
the provision and consequently we must hold that the contravention
occurred.
120. We find that the treatment alleged at 12(f),(g),(h), (i) and (j) has all been
proved.
121. By virtue of Regulation 18(7) MAPLE we find section 13 Equality Act 2010
does not apply to this treatment due to our findings above.
122. We find that the principal reason for dismissal was that the respondent
wanted to replace the claimant with Chris Beeley. We do not find that the
principal reason for dismissal was connected with the claimant’s pregnancy
or the fact that she availed herself of the benefits of additional maternity
leave. Accordingly, we do not find that he claimant was automatically
unfairly dismissed. We do not find that the reason for dismissal was some
other substantial reason, namely business reorganisation.
123. We find that the reason for dismissal was not a potentially fair reason.
Accordingly, we find that the claimant was unfairly dismissed.
124. Although time is not listed as an issue in the list of issues, it has been raised
by the respondent. In our judgment, there was a continuous course of
25