Case No: 3306483/2024
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant: Mrs H Bannerman
Respondent: The Land Restoration Trust
Heard at: Bury St Edmunds (via CVP)
On: 5 September 2024
Before: Employment Judge Graham
Representation
Claimant: In person
Respondent: Mr T Perry, Counsel
JUDGMENT
1. The Claimant’s application for interim relief is refused.
REASONS
Introduction
1. By way of an ET1 claim form presented on 8 July 2024 the Claimant claims
that she was automatically unfairly dismissed by the Respondent for making
protected disclosures contrary to section 103A of the Employment Rights
Act. The Claimant makes other complaints within her ET1.
2. This application for interim relief was presented within seven days of the
effective date of termination which was 2 July 2024.
3. The issue I had to determine in relation to this application was whether it
appears to me to be likely that on determining this claim a tribunal will be
satisfied that:
3.1 There was a protected disclosure; and
3.2 That disclosure was the reason or the principal reason for the Claimant’s
dismissal.
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 1 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
4. I made clear at the outset that I would not hear any oral evidence as this
was not a fact finding hearing but I would decide the application on the basis
of the written documents to which I was specifically referred and also the
submissions of the parties. I was provided with a bundle of 53 pages from
the Claimant, together with an investigation report commentary of 32 pages,
as well as a detailed skeleton argument from the Claimant. From the
Respondent I received a bundle of 170 pages, witness statements from
Alan Carter the Chief Executive and also Ian Betteley the Finance Director,
as well as a detailed skeleton argument and a bundle of authorities.
5. I reviewed all of the material I was directed to, including the Respondent’s
ET3 which had already been filed by the date of today’s hearing.
6. The Claimant informed me that she has Asperger’s Syndrome and ADHD
and I therefore discussed with her what adjustments would assist her. I
granted breaks at appropriate stages during the day, and the Claimant was
permitted to turn off her camera when the Respondent’s counsel was
speaking.
The Law
Protected Disclosures
7. The Employment Rights Act 1996 provides:
S. 43B(1) Disclosures qualifying for protection.
(1) In this Part a “ qualifying disclosure ” means any disclosure of
information which, in the reasonable belief of the worker making the
disclosure, is made in the public interest and tends to show one or more
of the following—
…
(b) that a person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any
legal obligation to which he is subject,
…
(d) that the health or safety of any individual has been, is being or is
likely to be endangered,
…
(5) In this Part “the relevant failure”, in relation to a qualifying disclosure,
means the matter falling within paragraphs (a) to (f) of subsection (1).
…
S. 43C Disclosure to employer or other responsible person.
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 2 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
(1) A qualifying disclosure is made in accordance with this section
if the worker makes the disclosure —
(a) to his employer, …
8. In Williams v Michelle Brown AM UKEAT0044/19/00, HHJ Auerbach set
out the test for identifying whether a qualifying disclosure has been made:
“It is worth restating, as the authorities have done many times, that this
definition breaks down into a number of elements. First, there must be a
disclosure of information. Secondly, the worker must believe that the
disclosure is made in the public interest. Thirdly, if the worker does hold
such a belief, it must be reasonably held. Fourthly, the worker must believe
that the disclosure tends to show one or more of the matters listed in sub-
paragraphs (a) to (f). Fifthly, if the worker does hold such a belief, it must be
reasonably held.
Unless all five conditions are satisfied there will be not be a qualifying
disclosure. [9 and 10]
9. There must be a disclosure of information. In Cavendish Munro
Professional Risks Management Ltd v Geduld [2010] IRLR 38, the EAT
held that to be protected, a disclosure must involve giving information and
must contain facts, and not simply voice a concern or raise an allegation:
"The ordinary meaning of giving "information" is conveying facts. In the
course of the hearing before us, a hypothetical was advanced regarding
communicating information about the state of a hospital. Communicating
"information" would be "The wards have not been cleaned for the past two
weeks. Yesterday, sharps were left lying around". Contrasted with that
would be a statement that "You are not complying with Health and Safety
requirements". In our view this would be an allegation not information." [24]
10. However, in Kilraine v London Borough of Wandsworth [2018] ICR 1850
the Court of Appeal held that:
“…the concept of “information” as used in section 43B(1) is capable of
covering statements which might also be characterised as allegations.
Langstaff J made the same point in the judgment below [2016] IRLR 422,
para 30, set out above, and I would respectfully endorse what he says there.
Section 43B(1) should not be glossed to introduce into it a rigid dichotomy
between “information” on the one hand and “allegations” on the other. …
On the other hand, although sometimes a statement which can be
characterised as an allegation will also constitute “information” and amount
to a qualifying disclosure within section 43B(1) , not every statement
involving an allegation will do so. Whether a particular allegation amounts
to a qualifying disclosure under section 43B(1) will depend on whether it
falls within the language used in that provision.” [30 and 31].
…
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 3 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
“The question in each case in relation to section 43B(1) (as it stood prior to
amendment in 2013) is whether a particular statement or disclosure is a
“disclosure of information which, in the reasonable belief of the worker
making the disclosure, tends to show one or more of the [matters set out in
paragraphs (a) to (f)]”. Grammatically, the word “information” has to be read
with the qualifying phrase, “which tends to show [etc]” (as, for example, in
the present case, information which tends to show “that a person has failed
or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation to which he is subject”).
In order for a statement or disclosure to be a qualifying disclosure according
to this language, it has to have a sufficient factual content and specificity
such as is capable of tending to show one of the matters listed in subsection
(1). The statements in the solicitors’ letter in the Cavendish Munro case did
not meet that standard.
Whether an identified statement or disclosure in any particular case does
meet that standard will be a matter for evaluative judgment by a tribunal in
the light of all the facts of the case. It is a question which is likely to be
closely aligned with the other requirement set out in section 43B(1), namely
that the worker making the disclosure should have the reasonable belief
that the information he discloses does tend to show one of the listed
matters. As explained by Underhill LJ in Chesterton Global Ltd v
Nurmohamed [2018] ICR 731 , para 8, this has both a subjective and an
objective element. If the worker subjectively believes that the information he
discloses does tend to show one of the listed matters and the statement or
disclosure he makes has a sufficient factual content and specificity such
that it is capable of tending to show that listed matter, it is likely that his
belief will be a reasonable belief.” [35 and 36].
…
“It is true that whether a particular disclosure satisfies the test in section
43B(1) should be assessed in the light of the particular context in which it is
made. If, to adapt the example given in the Cavendish Munro case [2010]
ICR 325, para 24, the worker brings his manager down to a particular ward
in a hospital, gestures to sharps left lying around and says “You are not
complying with health and safety requirements”, the statement would derive
force from the context in which it was made and taken in combination with
that context would constitute a qualifying disclosure. The oral statement
then would plainly be made with reference to the factual matters being
indicated by the worker at the time that it was made. If such a disclosure
was to be relied upon for the purposes of a whistleblowing claim under the
protected disclosures regime in Part IVA of the 1996 Act, the meaning of the
statement to be derived from its context should be explained in the claim
form and in the evidence of the Claimant so that it is clear on what basis the
worker alleges that he has a claim under that regime. The employer would
then have a fair opportunity to dispute the context relied upon, or whether
the oral statement could really be said to incorporate by reference any part
of the factual background in this manner” [41].
11. It is possible for several communications together to cumulatively amount
to a qualifying disclosure even where each communication is not a
qualifying disclosure on its own - Simpson v Cantor Fitzgerald Europe
[2020] EWCA Civ 1601. Here the Court of Appeal agreed with the
approach of the EAT in Norbrook Laboratories (GB) Ltd v Shaw
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 4 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
UKEAT/0150/13 where it was held that three emails taken together
amounted to a qualifying disclosure even where the last email did not have
the same recipients as the first two, as the former emails had been
embedded in the final email. It will be a question of fact for the tribunal at
the final hearing to decide whether two or more communications read
together may be aggregated to constitute a qualifying disclosure on a
cumulative basis.
12. As regards the Claimant’s belief about the information disclosed, the
question is whether the Claimant believed at the time of the alleged
disclosure that the disclosed information tended to show one or more of the
matters specified in section 43B(1). Beliefs the Claimant has come to hold
after the alleged disclosure are irrelevant. Whether at the time of the
alleged disclosure the Claimant held the belief that the information tended
to show one or more of the matters specified in s.43B(1) and, if so, which of
those matters, is a subjective question to be decided on the evidence as to
the Claimant’s beliefs. It is important for a tribunal to identify which of the
specified matters are relevant, as this will affect the reasonableness
question.
13. Whereas the test for reasonable belief is a low threshold, it must still be
based upon some evidence. Unfounded suspicions, rumours and
uncorroborated allegations are insufficient to establish reasonable belief.
14. The belief must be as to what the information tends to show, which is a
lower hurdle than having to believe that it does show one or more of the
specified matters. There is no rule that there must be a reference in the
disclosure to a specific legal obligation or a statement of the relevant
obligations nor is there a requirement that an implied reference to legal
obligations must be obvious. However, the fact that the disclosure itself
does not need to contain an express or even an obvious implied reference
to a legal obligation does not dilute the requirement that the Claimant must
prove that she had in mind a legal obligation of sufficient specificity at the
time he made the disclosure - Twist DX and others v Armes and others
UKEAT/0030/30/JOJ.
15. In Darnton v University of Surrey [2003] IRLR 133 it was held by HHJ
Serota that:
“In our opinion, it is essential to keep the words of the statute firmly in mind;
a qualifying disclosure is defined, as we have noted on a number of
occasions, as meaning any disclosure of information which in the
reasonable belief of the worker making the disclosure tends to show a
relevant failure. It is not helpful if these simple words become encrusted with
a great deal of authority…” [28] and
“We agree with the learned authors that, for there to be a qualifying
disclosure, it must have been reasonable for the worker to believe that the
factual basis of what was disclosed was true and that it tends to show a
relevant failure, even if the worker was wrong, but reasonably mistaken.”
[32].
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 5 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
16. The issue of reasonable belief was considered by the EAT in Korashi v
Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University Local Health Board [2012] IRLR
4 where the following example was provided by way of illustration:
“To take a simple example: a healthy young man who is taken into hospital
for an orthopaedic athletic injury should not die on the operating table. A
whistleblower who says that that tends to show a breach of duty is required
to demonstrate that such belief is reasonable. On the other hand, a surgeon
who knows the risk of such procedure and possibly the results of meta-
analysis of such procedure is in a good position to evaluate whether there
has been such a breach. While it might be reasonable for our lay observer
to believe that such death from a simple procedure was the product of a
breach of duty, an experienced surgeon might take an entirely different view
of what was reasonable given what further information he or she knows
about what happened at the table. So in our judgment what is reasonable
in s.43B involves of course an objective standard – that is the whole point
of the use of the adjective reasonable – and its application to the personal
circumstances of the discloser. It works both ways. Our lay observer must
expect to be tested on the reasonableness of his belief that some surgical
procedure has gone wrong is a breach of duty. Our consultant surgeon is
entitled to respect for his view, knowing what he does from his experience
and training, but is expected to look at all the material including the records
before making such a disclosure. To bring this back to our own case, many
whistleblowers are insiders. That means that they are so much more
informed about the goings-on of the organisation of which they make
complaint than outsiders, and that that insight entitles their views to respect.
Since the test is their 'reasonable' belief, that belief must be subject to what
a person in their position would reasonably believe to be wrong-doing.” [62]
17. As regards the public interest, the Court of Appeal in Chesterton Global
Ltd v Nurmohamed [2017] EWCA Civ 979, identified the following
principles:
i. There is a subjective element - the Tribunal must ask, did the worker
believe, at the time he was making it, that the making of the disclosure
was in the public interest?
ii. There is then an objective element - was that belief reasonable? That
exercise requires that the Tribunal recognise that there may be more
than one reasonable view as to whether a particular disclosure was in
the public interest.
iii. The necessary belief is simply that the disclosure is in the public interest.
The particular reasons why the worker believes that to be so are not
of the essence. As per Underhill LJ:
“That means that a disclosure does not cease to qualify simply because
the worker seeks, as not uncommonly happens, to justify it after the
event by reference to specific matters which the tribunal finds were not
in his head at the time he made it. Of course, if he cannot give credible
reasons for why he thought at the time that the disclosure was in the
public interest, that may cast doubt on whether he really thought so at
all; but the significance is evidential not substantive. Likewise, in
principle a tribunal might find that the particular reasons why the worker
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 6 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
believed the disclosure to be in the public interest did not reasonably
justify his belief, but nevertheless find it to have been reasonable for
different reasons which he had not articulated to himself at the time: all
that matters is that his (subjective) belief was (objectively) reasonable.”
[29]
iv. The reference to public interest involves a distinction between
disclosures which serve only the private or personal interest of the
worker making the disclosure, and those that serve a wider interest.
v. It is still possible that the disclosure of a breach of a claimant’s own
contract may satisfy the public interest test, if a sufficiently large
number of other employees share the same interest. In such a case it
will be necessary to consider the nature of the wrongdoing and the
interests affected, and also the identity of the alleged wrongdoer.
These are also referred to as the four factors in Chesterton.
18. It is not for the tribunal to determine if the disclosure was in the public
interest. Rather the question is:
i. whether the worker considered the disclosure to be in the public interest;
ii. whether the worker believed the disclosure served that interest; and
iii. whether that belief was reasonably held.
Breach of a legal obligation
19. As regards legal obligation, in Boulding v Land Securities Trillium (Media
Services) Ltd (2006) UKEAT/0023/06 HHJ McMullen QC held the
following:
“The legal principles appear to us to be as follow. The approach in ALM v
Bladon is one to be followed in whistle-blowing cases. That is, there is a
certain generosity in the construction of the statute and in the treatment of
the facts. Whistle-blowing is a form of discrimination claim (see Lucas v
Chichester UKEAT/0713/04). As to any of the alleged failures, the burden
of the proof is upon the Claimant to establish upon the balance of
probabilities any of the following:
(a) there was in fact and as a matter of law, a legal obligation (or other
relevant obligation) on the employer (or other relevant person) in each of
the circumstances relied on.
(b) the information disclosed tends to show that a person has failed, is failing
or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation to which he is subject.
“Likely” is concisely summarised in the headnote to Kraus v Penna pIc
[2004] IRLR 260, EAT Cox J and members:
“In this respect 'likely/ requires more than a possibility or risk that the
employer (or other person) might fail to comply with a relevant obligation.
The information disclosed should, in the reasonable belief of the worker at
the time it is disclosed, tend to show that it is probable, or more probable
than not that the employer (or other person) will fail to comply with the
relevant legal obligation. If the Claimant's belief is limited to the possibility
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 7 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
or risk of a breach of relevant legislation, this would not meet the statutory
test of likely to fail to comply.”” [24 and 25].
20. In Eiger Securities LLP v Korshunova [2017] ICR 561, Slade J held:
“In order to fall within ERA s.43B(1)(b)… the ET should have identified the
source of the legal obligations to which the Claimant believed Mr Ashton or
the Respondent were subject and how they had failed to comply with it. The
identification of the obligation does not have to be detailed or precise but it
must be more than a belief that certain actions are wrong. Actions may be
considered to be wrong because they are immoral, undesirable or in breach
of guidance without being in breach of a legal obligation…
The decision of the ET as to the nature of the legal obligation the Claimant
believed to have been breached is a necessary precursor to the decision as
to the reasonableness of the Claimant’s belief that a legal obligation has not
been complied with” [46 and 47].
21. Accordingly, whilst the identification of the legal obligation does not need to
be precise or detailed, it has to be more than a belief that what was being
done was wrong.
Endangerment of health and safety
22. As regards endangerment of health and safety, the term “health and safety”
is a generally well understood phrase and it will usually be clear whether
the subject matter of a disclosure could fall within its scope. It was
confirmed in the case of Hibbins v Hesters Way Neighbourhood Project
[2009] ICR 319, that the health and safety matter does not necessarily have
to fall under the direct control of the employer in order for protection to apply.
23. A disclosure of this nature will require sufficient detail of the perceived risk
to health and safety. In Fincham v HM Prison Service EAT 0925/01 the
worker was subjected to a campaign of racial harassment and informed the
employer that “I feel under constant pressure and stress awaiting the next
incident.” The Employment Appeal Tribunal concluded that this was
sufficient to amount to a qualifying disclosure:
“We found it impossible to see how a statement that says in terms “I am
under pressure and stress” is anything other than a statement that her
health and safety is being or at least is likely to be endangered. It seems to
us, therefore, that it is not a matter which can take its gloss from the
particular context in which the statement is made. It may well be that it was
relatively minor matter drawn to the attention of the employers in the course
of a much more significant letter. We know not. But nonetheless it does
seem to us that this was a disclosure tending to show that her own health
and safety was likely to endangered...” [30]
Automatic Unfair Dismissal
24. Section 103A of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provides:
Protected disclosure.
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 8 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
An employee who is dismissed shall be regarded for the purposes of this
Part as unfairly dismissed if the reason (or, if more than one, the principal
reason) for the dismissal is that the employee made a protected disclosure.
25. The statutory question is what motivated a particular decision maker to act
as they did – Kong v Gulf International Bank (UK) Ltd (Protect (the
Whistleblowing Charity) intervening) [2022] IRLR 854 [59].
26. The reason or principal reason for the dismissal means the employer’s
reason. This can be the reason of the dismissing officer, but it may be
necessary to look beyond that decision. In Royal Mail v Jhuti [2019] UKSC
55 (at paragraph 60), the Supreme Court held that where the reason for
dismissal is hidden from the decision maker behind an invented reason, it
is for the tribunal to look behind the invention rather than to allow it to infect
its decision, and provided the invented reason belongs to a person placed
in the hierarchy of responsibility above the employee, there is no difficultly
attributing that person’s state of mind to the employer, rather than that of
the decision maker.
27. As regards the burden of proof, in Kuzel v Roche Products Limited [2008]
IRLR 530, the Court held:
“The tribunal must then decide what was the reason or principal reason for
the dismissal of the Claimant on the basis that it was for the employer to
show what the reason was. If the employer does not show to the satisfaction
of the tribunal that the reason was what he asserted it was, it is open to the
tribunal to find that the reason was what the employee asserted it was. But
it is not correct to say, either as a matter of law or logic, that the tribunal
must find that, if the reason was not that asserted by the employer, then it
must have been for the reason asserted by the employee. That may often
be the outcome in practice, but it is not necessarily so.
As it is a matter of fact, the identification of the reason or principal reason
turns on direct evidence and permissible inferences from it. It may be open
to the tribunal to find that, on a consideration of all the evidence in the
particular case, the true reason for dismissal was not that advanced by
either side. In brief, an employer may fail in its case of fair dismissal for an
admissible reason, but that does not mean that the employer fails in
disputing the case advanced by the employee on the basis of an
automatically unfair dismissal on the basis of a different reason.” [59 and
60].
28. A case of whistleblowing dismissal is not made out simply by a “coincidence
of timing” between the making of disclosures and the termination of
employment - Parsons v Airplus International Ltd [2017]
UKEAT/0111/17 [43].
Interim Relief
29. By section 128(1) Employment Rights Act 1996, an employee who presents
a complaint of automatic unfair dismissal pursuant to section 103A may
apply to the tribunal for interim relief.
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 9 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
30. Section 129 sets out the procedure to be adopted by the tribunal before
considering making such an order.
31. Interim relief can be ordered where the tribunal finds that it is likely that a
final hearing will decide that the reason (or principal reason) for dismissal
was the employee having made protected disclosures. The test for interim
relief applications was initially set out in the decision in the case of Taplin v
Shippam Ltd [1978] ICR 1068 EAT which at paragraph 23 defined the word
“likely” as a “pretty good chance of success”. In Ministry of Justice v
Sarfraz [2011] IRLR 562 it was held at paragraph 16 that the word likely
“does not mean simply “more likely than not” — that is at least 51 per cent
— but connotes a significantly higher degree of likelihood.”
32. In Dandpat v The University of Bath and Ors UKEAT/0408/09 the EAT
observed that the meaning of the word likely is context specific and it sought
to distinguish the meaning of that word in interim relief hearings from its use
when, for example, determining whether someone is disabled. It was held
at paragraph 20:
“We do in fact see good reasons of policy for setting the test comparatively
high, in the way in which this Tribunal did, in the case of applications for
interim relief. If relief is granted the Respondent is irretrievably prejudiced
because he is obliged to treat the contract as continuing, and pay the
Claimant, until the conclusion of proceedings: that is not consequence that
should be imposed lightly.”
33. Accordingly the standard of proof required is greater than the balance of
probability test to be applied at the main hearing.
34. As was noted in Simply Smile Manor House and others v Ter-Berg
[2020] IRLR 97, the likely to succeed test applies to all elements of the
claim.
35. The burden of proof therefore rests with the Claimant to persuade me that
it is likely that the tribunal at a final hearing will find that she made the
disclosures to her employer; that she reasonably believed that they tended
to show one or more of the matters within s. 43B(1) ERA 1996; she
reasonably believed that the disclosures were made in the public interest;
and the disclosures was or were the principal cause of her dismissal. The
EAT in Sarfraz referred to a fifth matter, which was the previous
requirement for the disclosure to have been made in good faith, however
this has since been removed by s. 18 Enterprise and Regulatory Reform
Act 2013 and is now relevant only to the matter of compensation.
36. When making a decision on an interim relief application I do not make any
formal findings of fact which are intended to be binding at any later stage of
the proceedings. I am assessing, amongst other things, the likelihood of
disputed facts being proven in the Claimant’s favour at the final hearing.
There is only limited material available to a judge on an interim relief
application but my decision has to be based on whatever material is
available.
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 1 0 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
Background
37. As I understand from the parties, the Respondent owns and manages public
open spaces and the Claimant was employed as an Estates and Facilities
Officer at the Respondent’s site in Marleigh, Cambridge from 6 December
2021 until the termination of her employment on 2 July 2024.
38. I understand that the site at Marleigh comprises of around 300 new build
properties and some community facilities which the Respondent manages
in a partnership with Hill Marshall (also referred to as Hill) which is a joint
venture between the developer and landowner. Marleigh Estate
Management Company Limited (“MEMC”) was formed by Hill and has a
contract with the Respondent for the delivery of estate services under an
Estate Management Contract (“EMC”) dated 3 September 2020.
39. I also understand that the Claimant’s role included (but may not have been
limited to) managing the community centre at Marleigh and she would also
act as a point of contact for business partners from Hill and MEMC, and she
was also required to raise necessary matters and to maintain service level
delivery within budget. Other duties have been referred to but this a general
summary of what I understood to be the Claimant’s role.
40. The Claimant says that she had previously declined to accept a role with
the Respondent because she discovered that she would be dealing with Hill
whom she had dealt with before and had a bad experience with. The
Claimant says that she was persuaded to take the role and that she would
be protected by her line manager(s).
41. The Claimant tells me that there had been an issue with water safety
impacting residents in early in 2024 whereby a “do not use water” notice
was issued on 18 January 2024 by the water company, and on 22 January
a “do not drink” notice was issued, and that this incident was resolved on
24 January 2024. This has been referred to as “the water crisis” by the
Claimant.
42. The Claimant says that she brought this to the attention of Mr Carter (the
Chief Executive of the Respondent) on 19 January 2024 who she says told
her to ‘tactically retreat from all things water’ and she was told to work from
home, however she stayed involved and out of sight so as to not openly
disobey his instructions.
43. The alleged whistleblowing features of this claim centre around two alleged
disclosures the Claimant says that she made to Mr Carter on 2 February
and 8 February 2024.
44. The Claimant says at paragraph 6 of her particulars of claim that she
verbally informed Mr Carter of her belief that there was conflict and
confusion over roles and responsibilities and that this resulted in there being
nobody to take charge during the water crisis.
45. The Claimant tells me that the handwritten and typed version of the notes
of those meetings produced by Mr Carter are accurate, although she goes
on to say they were not fully complete and did not capture word for word
everything that was said. The Claimant says she was raising concerns
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 1 1 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
about a breach of a legal obligation (the EMC), and secondly the potential
health and safety impact of that upon residents, of which the water crisis
was an illustration.
46. As to what may have been said, the notes prepared by Mr Carter record
that on 2 February the Claimant had said that Hill/Marshall as joint venture
were not responding to the community needs that they have; the water crisis
is an illustration; and they thought that the Claimant was trouble. This is
generally consistent with the Claimant’s particulars of claim at paragraph
19. In oral submissions the Claimant informed me that whilst at the time
she was under the impression that the failure was of Hill, she now considers
that the failure was that of the Respondent which should have known about
the water crisis and informed others about it.
47. At paragraph 22 of the Claimant’s particulars of claim she deals with the
second alleged disclosure of 8 February 2024 where she says that she
remained concerned that people may be “dead in their beds” because no-
one had been to check on them, and that Mr Carter had told her she was
doing too much, to step back, and that he held up the EMC and said that it
did not say that she was responsible for people being dead in their beds.
48. I was referred to the copy of the notes of this meeting prepared by Mr Carter,
which the Claimant agrees are accurate, and I note that they list the
following bullet points:
 Feeling a bit wired. Juggling. Feeling supported and exposed.
 No one knows what’s going on apart from me.
 Out of control
 I can’t do the basics of the job
 Site walks
 Operate centre safely
 Bullying and awful nature of Hill/Marshall
 No one understanding the remit
 Residents and aftermath of water crisis
 Hilary feels responsibility to report it
 Duty of care
 Hill Marshall don’t do paperwork etc.
 Come up against misogyny
 Put in my place
 Expose or undermine – not supported
49. The reference to people being dead in their beds is not listed in that note.
The Claimant has invited me to view the two conversations as either
protected disclosures in their own right or to view them cumulatively. The
Claimant tells me that these alleged disclosures tended to show a long list
of matters set out at paragraph 24 of her particulars, in summary they
tended to show a breach of a legal obligation (namely the terms of the EMC)
and that the health and safety of those living and working at Marleigh had
been endangered during the water crisis.
50. The Claimant also says that her disclosures were not made for personal
gain, she believed the information was true, and that belief was reasonable.
The Claimant provides a long list of reasons why she says that she
reasonably believed that the alleged disclosures were in the public interest,
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 1 2 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
including (but not limited to) that there was a risk of harm to people on other
sites due to potential ignorance of contractual obligations, other
developments were planned and the lessons learned from the water crisis
would be relevant to them; and local residents were paying a service charge
to the Respondent and deserved better.
51. The Claimant says that following this the Respondent scrabbled around to
find reasons to dismiss her, however her arguments were at times complex
and contradictory as she made reference to Hill not wanting her there, and
finding ways to remove her, much of this allegedly occurring before her
alleged protected disclosures were made. The Claimant had also made
reference to matters occurring in January 2024, which is before her alleged
disclosures, where she said she was in fear of dismissal and that her job
was at risk.
52. The Claimant’s flow chart produced or relied upon for today’s hearing
records for 24 to 30 January her feelings that “No one will engage me. I am
in despair. I feel a target on my back” and on 31 January she recorded “As
a last-ditch effort to avoid being sacked, I reach out to a former director of
both Hill and Marshall.” These alleged difficulties with Hill and the
Respondent and her feelings that she will be dismissed are recorded by the
Claimant as occurring in advance of her alleged protected disclosures.
53. The Claimant’s particulars (paragraph 26e) states the Respondent did not
know that the root cause of the tension (with the contract parties) was their
failure to meet the terms of the EMC and the reason for her removal was
that the Respondent knew of no other means by which to release some of
the pressure being placed upon it by MEMC to improve the contractual
performance, and that they acted in haste at the behest of MEMC in a
misguided attempt to reduce their exposure to financial reputational risk.
54. The Claimant’s particulars of claim also contain a number of references to
matters allegedly occurring in advance of those alleged disclosures. For
example “the reason for my dismissal is that my employer undermined my
ability to do my job” (paragraph 34). The Claimant also makes references
to being consistently upset by censure and confused by criticism from
MEMC (paragraph 36), a history of conflict (paragraph 37), and other
pressure applied by MEMC (paragraph 38). The Claimant also says in her
ET1 that her feeling was that her alleged disclosures “influenced” the
Respondent’s subsequent decision to dismiss her on 2 July 2024
(paragraph 40).
55. The Claimant has addressed the Respondent’s three grounds for
dismissing her for misconduct and she tells me that the first ground involving
an altercation with a third party contractor (Encore), including an allegation
that she made a negative comment about nationality, had been
exaggerated and relied upon as an excuse although she accepts that she
made a reference to his nationality in order to help her remember him.
56. The Claimant says that the second reason which involved her appointing
staff was also an excuse and that she had not hired them as employees,
although she accepts that she engaged one person who had recently been
dismissed (by another employer), although she disputes that she was not
entitled to do so contractually, and she relies upon emergency provisions in
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 1 3 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
the contract. The Claimant also acknowledges that there was another
matter whereby she engaged someone to work with local youths. Whilst
the Claimant says that these two people were not employed by her, she
acknowledges that there was some expenditure for their time albeit at
limited cost.
57. Finally the Claimant addressed the third reason which was that she had
committed a data protection breach. The Claimant acknowledges that she
sent work material to her home email account, but she suggests that it had
been relied upon as an excuse when the Respondent knew that she was
mentally unwell and should not have been allowed her to continue to have
access her IT after being sent home from work on 19 February 2024 in
particular because she says they knew she had been warned previously
about the use of her private email account.
58. The Claimant’s argument is that these three reasons were simply relied
upon as excuses, and that the true reason was due to her protected
disclosures, although at the same time she appears to argue that it was due
to pressure from Hill or MEMC to remove her.
59. The Claimant spoke at length during the hearing, and whilst much of her
oral submissions were directed towards the legal issues for me to decide
today, I found her submissions on causation to be difficult to follow as the
focus appeared to shift from the Respondent allegedly dismissing her for
whistleblowing, to pressure being applied on the Respondent by Hill or
MEMC to remove her other reasons.
60. The Respondent submits that the communications of 2 and 8 February were
not protected disclosures at all, although the Respondent recognised that
depending upon what is said at the final hearing it is possible theoretically
that the Claimant’s comments of 8 February could amount to protected
disclosure, but that at the moment the information currently before the
tribunal falls far short of that. The Respondent says that viewing these two
communications cumulatively does not alter the position.
61. The Respondent points out that the notes of the conversations between the
Claimant and Mr Carter and do not demonstrate any criticism of the
Respondent. The criticism is of Hill and as such it is very unlikely that a
tribunal will find that the information tended to show that the Respondent
was not complying with a legal obligation.
62. The Respondent relies on the reasons why it says it terminated the
Claimant’s employment (misconduct, breach of trust and confidence, and
acting in a manner likely to bring the Respondent into disrepute) and it relies
heavily on the difficulties it says the Claimant will face when it comes to
causation specifically whether the disclosure or disclosures were the reason
or principal reason for her dismissal by Mr Betteley (the Finance Director).
Within the witness statement of Mr Betteley he refers to the Respondent
conducting a disciplinary investigation and undertaking interviews with
witnesses, he says that the water incident was excluded from consideration
although the Claimant sought to refer to it, and he looked into whether
MEMC wanted to remove the Claimant however he says he was informed
by Mr Carter that this was untrue and that they were raising operational
concerns. Mr Betteley says that no mention was made of whistleblowing by
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 1 4 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
anyone when he conducted the disciplinary hearing, and that he was not
even aware of the conversation between the Claimant and Mr Carter on 2
and 8 February 2024 so it had no bearing on his decision.
63. The Respondent brings to my attention the references within the Claimant’s
own ET1 which I have referred to already about the reasons why she says
she felt that her employment was terminated, and further it points out that
there is an absence of any evidence that Mr Carter passed on to Mr Betteley
the information the Claimant says that she gave to him. The Respondent
reminds me that for the purposes of causation it is not enough that these
alleged disclosures influenced the decision to dismiss, they must be the
reason or the principal reason.
Conclusion
64. In coming to my decision, I must take an impressionistic view of the
documentary evidence before me, noting that no oral evidence has been
given on oath or tested by cross examination. I have therefore carried out
a summary assessment of the material before me to form a view as to
whether the Claimant is likely to succeed in her claim.
65. I consider that it is unlikely that a tribunal will find that the alleged disclosure
of 2 February was a protected disclosure because it appears to me unlikely
that the Claimant will persuade the tribunal that the information she says
she disclosed tended to show one of the failures the Claimant relies upon.
Leaving aside what the Claimant says that she believes now, simply looking
at what the Claimant says that she expressed at the time, which is generally
consistent with the Respondent’s account in the notes and the witness
statement of Mr Carter, it is my view that it is not likely that the Claimant will
demonstrate that the information tended to show a breach of a legal
obligation by the Respondent or the endangerment of health and safety.
Whereas tribunals should avoid a rigid dichotomy between allegations and
information (Kilraine), the information which the Claimant says she
disclosed appears to me unlikely to amount to more than a general criticism
of the Respondent’s contract partner or client, rather than the Respondent
itself.
66. The situation is slightly different with respect to what the Claimant says was
discussed on 8 February and it appears to me that there is some prospect
that the Claimant may be able to demonstrate at a final hearing that the that
the information she says that she was disclosing tended to show either:
(b) that a person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any
legal obligation to which he is subject, or
(d) that the health or safety of any individual has been, is being or is likely
to be endangered,
67. There is some possibility that some of what is recorded could be found to
have been a protected disclosure and whilst these could tend to show one
of the failures she relies upon, this would be dependent upon the Claimant’s
own witness evidence of was specifically said beyond these very brief bullet
points. It also appears to me that it is possible that the Claimant may be
able to show that it was reasonable for her to believe that the information
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 1 5 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
tended to show the failures relied upon, and further that she reasonably
believed that these were disclosed in the public interest, but this is
dependent upon what information was actually disclosed and whether it
contained sufficient factual content and specificity.
68. My summary view therefore is that the Claimant has some prospect of
showing that, however I do not consider that it is likely that she will be able
to do so. This requires a far higher threshold to be met, and based upon
the information before me today, my view is that whilst it possible that the
Claimant may be able to persuade a tribunal at the final hearing what was
disclosed on 8 February amounts to a protected disclosure, I do not find
based upon what is before me today that it is likely or that there is a pretty
good chance that she will be able to do so.
69. By way of example there is clear a dispute of fact about whether the
Claimant used the expression about finding residents dead in their beds –
it is not recorded the Respondent’s notes which the Claimant says were
accurate, and Mr Carter denies that it was said. In many respects there is
a lack of clarity as to what was actually said, and therefore it follows that
there is a lack of clarity as to what it tended to show. At present it is not
sufficiently clear what was said. Evidence will need to be heard and tested
at a final hearing.
70. Having considered both alleged disclosures from 2 and 8 February 2024
together (as per Norbrook), this does not alter my impression that the
Claimant’s is not likely to show that she made a protected disclosure.
71. Leaving aside the issue of whether it is likely that the Claimant will be found
to have made a protected disclosure, I would like to address the issue of
causation.
72. I am not satisfied to the extent that I need to be from the material before me
today (including the oral submissions), that the Claimant will be able to show
that the reason or principal reason for her dismissal was that she made a
protected disclosure.
73. This is because the material place before me today and the oral arguments
fall far short of that. I have in mind the Claimant’s own admission that she
says that her employment was in jeopardy just before her first disclosure on
2 February, and the Claimant has made numerous references to difficulties
of working with Hill previously – she says she initially rejected her role as
she had history with them.
74. The Claimant’s ET1 claim form also suggests other reasons why she was
dismissed, including undermining her role before her disclosures. I also
take into consideration that whereas the Claimant challenges the factual
premise of two of the Respondent’s reasons for dismissing her, she does
not dispute the data protection incident occurred. I make it clear that the
Claimant has not conceded to me that it amounted to misconduct or that it
would have justified dismissal, she has simply been candid and informed
me that she sent work material to her home email account, and she has
sought to explain the background to that event. I have not interpreted this
as a concession, and I am clear that I am making no findings of fact in this
hearing.
10.7 Judgment with reasons – rule 62 1 6 March 2017

Case No: 3306483/2024
75. Some of the difficulty I had with the Claimant’s arguments on causation was
due to what appeared to be the competing reasons why she says she was
dismissed. As the Respondent correctly reminds me, it is not sufficient for
the disclosure(s) to have been an influence, as the legislation requires that
they must have been the reason or the principal reason for dismissal. In
this case, based upon what has been presented to me, it appears to me
unlikely that even if the Claimant persuades the tribunal at a final hearing
that she made one or more protected disclosures, it is not likely that she will
persuade that tribunal that what she says she disclosed on 2 and 8 February
2024 to Mr Carter was the reason (or principal reason) for her dismissal by
Mr Betteley.
76. I consider that a proper evaluation is required by the tribunal to make
findings after hearing all the evidence on the allegations which the
Respondent says formed the reasons for the Claimant’s dismissal.
77. These documents do not suggest a direct causal link between the alleged
disclosures and the dismissal and what was allegedly said on 2 and 8
February 2024. There are clearly factual disputes between the parties.
78. This is not to say that the Claimant will not be able to satisfy the tribunal on
the balance of probabilities that the reason or principal reason for her
dismissal was because she made protected disclosures. It will be a matter
for the final tribunal to determine the veracity of the Respondent’s case and
only then will it be possible to properly determine the motivation behind the
dismissal. However, on the information before me, I cannot say that the final
tribunal is likely to find that the reason or principal reason for the dismissal
was the alleged disclosures.
79. The application for interim relief is therefore refused.
80. I thank Mrs Bannerman and Mr Perry for their assistance throughout today,
including delivering oral and written submissions of such a high quality.
_____________________________________
Employment Judge Graham
______________________________________
Date 5 September 2024
JUDGMENT & REASONS SENT TO THE PARTIES ON
22 November 2024...........................................................
........................................................................................