EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS (SCOTLAND)
Case no: 4104864/2024
Final Hearing held in Dundee on 3,4,5,6,7, 10,11,12,13 and 14 February;
16,17,18, 21,22,23,24, 25, 28 and 29 July; and 1 and 2 September 2025;
with deliberation days on 14, 15, 16 and 20 October, and 26 November,
2025
Employment Judge A Kemp
Tribunal Member L Brown
Tribunal Member C Russell
S Peggie Claimant
Represented by:
Ms N Cunningham and
Ms C Elves,
Barristers
Instructed by:
Ms M Gribbon,
Solicitor
Fife Health Board First respondent
Queen Margaret Hospital NHS Trust Represented by:
Queen Margaret Hospital Ms J Russell KC
Instructed by:
Mr A Watson,
Solicitor
Dr B Upton Second respondent
Queen Margaret Hospital NHS Trust Represented by:
Queen Margaret Hospital Ms J Russell KC
Instructed by:
Mr A Watson,
Solicitor
JUDGMENT OF THE EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
The unanimous Judgment of the Tribunal is that:
E.T. Z4 (WR)

4104864/2024 Page 2
1. The first respondent harassed the claimant contrary to section 26(1)
of the Equality Act 2010 (“the Act”) by:
(a) failing to revoke the grant of permission to the second
respondent to use the female staff changing room of the
Emergency Department of Victoria Hospital, Kirkcaldy from
on and after 16 September 2023 until the claimant returned
to work on 14 April 2024 when rota arrangements were
made such that the claimant and second respondent were
not working together at the same time, as a result of which
the second respondent entered the said changing room
when the claimant was present on 25 October 2023 and the
claimant entered it when the second respondent was
present for a period over midnight on 24-25 December
2023;
(b) taking an unreasonable length of time to investigate the
second respondent’s allegations against the claimant in
the period from its commencement on 5 January 2024, a
reasonable period of time to do so being not more than six
months;
(c) making reference to patient care allegations against the
claimant on 28 March 2024; and
(d) giving an instruction to the claimant on 5 July 2024 not to
discuss the case, until a further message on 22 July 2024
confirmed that that applied only to the investigation.
2. The claim of harassment under section 26(1) so far as made by the
claimant beyond those findings does not succeed, and the claims
under sections 26(2) and (3) do not succeed and those claims are
dismissed.
3. The claim of direct discrimination contrary to section 13 of the Act
does not succeed and is dismissed.
4. The claim of indirect discrimination contrary to section 19 of the Act
does not succeed and is dismissed.
5. The claim of victimisation contrary to section 27 of the Act does not
succeed and is dismissed.
6. The claim as directed against the second respondent does not
succeed and is dismissed.
A Final Hearing on remedy will be fixed separately.

4104864/2024 Page 3
REASONS
Introduction
1. This was a Final Hearing held in person, confined to issues of liability in
respect of claims under the Equality Act 2010.
2. The claimant and second respondent are both employed by the first
respondent, the former with very long service as a nurse and the latter at
the earlier stages of a career as what was termed at that time a junior
doctor. They have beliefs that in some respects are in conflict. The
claimant is a woman who holds what are often called gender critical
beliefs. The second respondent is a trans woman, who identifies as female
and had been permitted by the first respondent to use the female changing
room used by staff at a hospital where they both worked. The issues
before the Tribunal concern centrally but far from solely an encounter
between them in that changing room around the last minutes of Christmas
Eve and into Christmas Day 2023, and how the first respondent dealt with
a complaint by the second respondent against the claimant that followed
it.
3. The Supreme Court, in the case of For Women Scotland Ltd v Scottish
Ministers [2025] ICR 899 (“FWS”) which was issued between the first set
of dates for the Final Hearing in February 2025 and the second in July
2025, and is addressed further below, said the following about its role:
“It is not the role of the court to adjudicate on the arguments in the
public domain on the meaning of gender or sex, nor is it to define
the meaning of the word “woman” other than when it is used in the
provisions of the EA 2010. It has a more limited role which does not
involve making policy.”
4. This Tribunal also has a limited role. Its function in essence is to identify
the issues arising from the case before it, assess the evidence it heard,
consider the submissions made to it by the parties, apply the law as the
Tribunal finds it to be to the facts it has found established in order to
answer those issues, and give its reasons for doing so, as required by
Rule 60 of the Employment Tribunal Procedure Rules 2024 (“the Rules”).
The Tribunal does not purport to decide all of the matters that were raised
during the evidence in the case, some of which in the Tribunal’s opinion
strayed beyond the scope of any of the issues before it and into the
arguments in the public domain.
5. In a number of respects the issues in the case are novel and complex.
That has led to a judgment that is unusually lengthy.

4104864/2024 Page 4
Claims
6. The claims made by the claimant are, following the order of sections in the
Act relied upon:
(i) direct discrimination because of (a) sex or (b) belief, under section
13 of the Equality Act 2010 (“the Act”)
(ii) indirect discrimination in relation to a protected characteristic, being
(a) sex or (b) belief, under section 19 of the Act
(iii) harassment related to (a) sex or (b) belief, under section 26(1) of the
Act
(iv) sexual harassment, under section 26(2) of the Act
(v) harassment by rejection of harassment, under section 26(3) of the
Act, and
(vi) victimisation, under section 27 of the Act.
Procedural history
7. There has been a comparatively high number of Preliminary Hearings held
in the case. The first Preliminary Hearing before EJ d’Inverno held on
26 August 2024 addressed a number of case management matters and
made orders, after which dates for the Final Hearing were fixed for
between 3 and 14 February 2025, restricted to liability.
8. The second Preliminary Hearing before EJ Tinnion held on 28 and 29
November 2024 addressed an application by the claimant for orders as to
documents and information, which was decided by Note with case
management orders for those matters dated and issued on 3 January
2025, as well as an application for an order for privacy made by the
respondents, to summarise that briefly, which was refused by Note dated
5 January 2025 and issued to parties the following day.
9. The third Preliminary Hearing before EJ Kemp on 21 January 2025 was
held firstly on an open basis, and secondly on a closed basis, and Notes
in respect of each were issued on 22 January 2025. The Note of the open
part of that hearing granted orders in relation to an application for what is
generally known as live tweeting, orders in relation to the evidence of
witnesses, granted an application for amendment which added to the
claims that for direct discrimination in substitution for one as to alleged
protected disclosures and to add a new claim under section 26(3) of the
Act. It also had comments with regard to the use of terminology at this

4104864/2024 Page 5
hearing, in respect of which no orders were made for the reasons set out
in that Note.
10. The Note of the closed part of that hearing dealt with a number of case
management issues, including as to written witness statements, and a
related Supplementary Bundle of Documents, for two witnesses giving
what the parties described as research evidence, which the parties had
agreed between themselves they wished to do.
11. During the first days of evidence in February 2025 issues arose with
regard to the numbers observing the proceedings remotely, and some
disruptions to the hearing, as a result of which a Note was issued in
relation to that on 12 February 2025. A number of other matters were
addressed during that hearing.
12. The ten days allocated at the first Preliminary Hearing proved to be
insufficient, and further days were fixed in order to conclude that hearing,
commencing on 16 July 2025 and leading to what was a most
unfortunately long delay to the conclusion of the evidence and
submissions. In the intervening period a number of issues arose, which
were dealt with at further Preliminary Hearings, and the Tribunal issued a
series of Notes and related orders.
13. The first of these, and the fourth Preliminary Hearing, was held on 18
March 2025. It refused an application by the respondents to vary the order
of 3 January 2025, refused the claimant’s application to add Dr Searle as
a third respondent and add as an additional detriment an email from Mr
Doyle, granted an application by the claimant to amend the pleadings to
include as a detriment Dr Searle’s email of 29 December 2023, refused
the claimant’s application for inspection and for an unless order, and
deferred a decision on an application as to a search of the second
respondent’s mobile phone. The second on 14 May 2025 addressed
issues as to remote observation and related matters. The third on 15 May
2025 refused the claimant’s application for the said search, granted an
application for amendment regarding emails of 29 December 2023, and 5
January 2024, and provided for further pleading and documents in relation
to that amendment. The fourth and fifth on 3 and 22 June 2025 addressed
issues of open justice and in relation to the claimant having arranged for
stenographers to prepare a transcript of the evidence to be given in the
July hearing dates.
14. A Preliminary Hearing was also arranged to take place on 15 July 2025,
being the day before the resumption of the adjourned Final Hearing, to
address case management issues in advance of that, as the parties had
requested. An oral decision was given on the following day which, in very
brief summary: (i) did not uphold the claimant’s objection to the
respondents leading two witnesses, (ii) received a statement from Mr
Peter Donaldson of the first respondent, and as the claimant wished to

4104864/2024 Page 6
cross examine him arranged that he also give evidence for the
respondents; although no order for a written witness statement had been
made the Tribunal agreed that his statement could be taken as evidence
in chief, that being unopposed; (iii) received (intimated during the
Preliminary Hearing) a report from Mr Jim Borwick a skilled (expert)
witness instructed by the claimant, and allowed the claimant to call him as
an additional witness although she had closed her case in February 2025
without objection from the respondents, and (iv) received a supplementary
witness statement and documents referred to from Mx Vic Valentine a
witness for the respondents, without objection from the claimant.
15. Further issues arose during the July hearing, which included that the
claimant had wished to call an additional witness, an application for which
was granted initially, but that witness then withdrew her co-operation
overnight on 28-29 July 2025. The claimant on the latter date applied to
have an order for a document and to hear evidence from her solicitor in
relation to a witness statement drafted for that intended witness. That was
addressed in private session as a case management matter under Rule
30, at the request of the claimant’s counsel and without objection, and
after hearing submissions for reasons given orally to the parties the
Tribunal refused the application.
16. On 29 July 2025 the claimant was recalled to give evidence on points
arising from the evidence of Ms Wishart and Ms Nicoll where she had not
had a reasonable opportunity to address that in her evidence in February
2025, and was cross examined on that evidence, and she was permitted
to lead an additional witness Ms Moore, as noted below.
17. The evidence for both parties was thereafter on that day confirmed as
having been concluded. The Tribunal gave directions as to submissions,
as summarised below, and after written submissions were given they were
made orally on 1 and 2 September 2025.
18. On 1 September 2025 an issue arose over the details in the written
submissions with regard to the second respondent, on which the parties
had sent a series of emails, which the respondents argued should not be
made publicly available, and which the claimant argued should be. For
reasons given orally and then later set out in a Note and Order a Rule 49
order was made in relation to the former name or names used by the
second respondent, and that subject to compliance with that order the
submissions could be released, as then took place.
19. At shortly before midnight on 1 September 2025 the respondents emailed
the Tribunal with a commentary on their Higgs defence, a matter
discussed below, which they argued did not require to be within the
pleadings or a list of issues, but which the claimant argued did, and
required amendment both of pleadings and the List of Issues. That was
addressed by oral submission on 2 September 2025 with further written

4104864/2024 Page 7
submissions from the respondents on 9 September 2025 with regard to
that point, and supplementary submissions on the substantive claim from
both parties on 16 September 2025. The Tribunal issued a written decision
on those matters by Note on 24 September 2025 refusing the application
in relation to the pleadings as being unnecessary and granting that in
relation to the List of Issues.
20. On 13 October 2025 the claimant made a further supplementary
submission by email which referred to what she said had been issued by
the first respondent on 30 September 2025, which was attached. It was
said to be an Equality and Children’s Rights Impact Assessment (Stage 1)
pursuant to duties under the Equality Act 2010 and the Equality Act 2010
(Specific Duties) Scotland Regulations 2012. The respondents replied to
that on 14 October 2025 not disputing that the assessment had been
issued by the first respondent but noting that that was after all evidence
and submissions had concluded. The claimant made a further written
submission on 16 October 2025. The issue is addressed below.
21. Applications were also made by three organisations under Rule 36 to
participate in the proceedings in order to make written submissions. The
first two were granted unopposed. Written submissions from the parties
concerned, For Women Scotland and Not All Gays, were provided. The
third application was from TransLucent, which for reasons addressed on
29 August 2025 the Tribunal allowed although the claimant had objected
to that, and the written submission tendered by that organisation was
considered.
22. This unanimous Judgment of the Tribunal was produced after its
deliberations, held over four days in October 2025 and finally on 26
November 2025. The Tribunal has been requested in submission to deal
with all of the matters raised by the case, including ones which would
ordinarily not require to be addressed following a particular finding, and in
the circumstances of anticipated appellate proceedings as raised during
the hearing has decided that it is in accordance with the overriding
objective to do so.
Terminology
23. This Judgment seeks to follow the comments as to terminology in the Note
from the open part of the hearing on 21 January 2025. The Act uses the
term “transsexual” which has been subject to adverse judicial comment for
a considerable period, as noted below, but remains the term in the Act.
24. Issues as to the sex of the claimant and second respondent, the protected
characteristics each holds, including their respective beliefs, are central to
this case, and are in dispute. The Tribunal is required to remain, and be

4104864/2024 Page 8
seen to remain, impartial between the parties in this case. The Equal
Treatment Bench Book issued by the Judicial College says the following:
“Typically, it should be unproblematic for the judge to use the trans
person’s preferred name and pronouns (“he/she” or “they”),
regardless of whether they have obtained a GRC. However, where
one side’s case hinges on the recognition of the biological sex of
the trans person as crucial, and the other side on the recognition of
their chosen identification, judges need to be careful not to let the
choice of gendered pronouns give an appearance of bias, or that
there is a predetermined conclusion. If possible, using the
individual’s name instead of a pronoun where these pronouns are
contested, or alternatively, the gender-neutral pronoun of “they”
may help minimise offence towards, or the undermining of, an
individual’s personal identification, while also not validating and
giving it undue weight over the perceptions of others.”
25. That is guidance which we have broadly followed both during the hearing
and in this Judgment, although we considered that not using pronouns for
the second respondent was preferable to using that of “they” given that
that is not the pronoun that the second respondent wished to be used as
we understood it. There is separately an Equal Treatment Bench Book
issued by the Judicial Institute, intended for civil and criminal courts in
Scotland, which does not have the same level of guidance directly
applicable to the circumstances in this case.
26. The claimant does not dispute that the second respondent is a person to
whom the provisions as to gender reassignment apply, such that the
second respondent has the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment. The Tribunal will use the terms “trans woman” being a
person assigned male by sex at birth who has the protected characteristic
of gender reassignment in the context of transition to female, and “trans
man” being a person assigned as male by sex at birth who has the
protected characteristic of gender reassignment in the context of transition
to male, or the generic “trans person”, although those terms do not appear
in the Act. It broadly follows the terminology used by the Supreme Court
in FWS.
27. Ms Cunningham referred in cross examination to the second respondent
as not being a “literal woman” by which it is understood she meant a
person assigned as female at birth whose body was capable (absent
medical issues) of producing eggs, and that the second respondent was a
“literal man” by which it is understood she meant a person assigned male
at birth whose body was capable (absent medical issues) of producing
sperm. The claimant in her evidence and in documentation submitted to
the Tribunal by her agents referred to the second respondent as a man
and used male pronouns. Her counsel used the same pronouns when

4104864/2024 Page 9
questioning the respondents’ witnesses, and the second respondent, in
cross examination, and in oral and written submissions.
28. The second respondent believed that the second respondent had the
gender and sex of a female (the sex of the second respondent under
section 11 is addressed below), gave evidence on that basis, and wished
to use the term “cis woman” for a person assigned female at birth and “cis
man” for a person assigned male at birth. In documentation submitted to
the Tribunal for the respondents, and during the second respondent’s
evidence in chief and that from witnesses for the first respondent, and in
cross examination of the claimant, the second respondent was referred to
as a female and female pronouns were used.
29. There were therefore a number of differences of terminology used during
the Final Hearing, particularly in the examination in chief and cross
examination of the second respondent but also in the examination in chief
and cross examination of the claimant and her witnesses, and of the first
respondent’s witnesses. It meant for example that a question in cross
examination of the respondents’ witnesses relating to the second
respondent used male pronouns and the answer was with female
pronouns. Ms Russell raised that issue on a number of occasions, arguing
that it was misgendering, amounted to harassment of the second
respondent under section 26, and had the potential to confuse witnesses.
The Tribunal reviewed the position on a regular basis, and did not consider
that any witness was confused as to what the use of the male pronoun for
the second respondent meant. One witness, Ms Glancey, was asked
about that issue directly, and stated that she was not confused. The
Tribunal did not consider at any stage that it was appropriate under the
overriding objective to make any order or other direction on the use of
language.
30. The desire to use neutral terminology in this Judgment to seek to avoid a
perception of lack of impartiality has resulted in somewhat stilted language
being used on a number of occasions. There are several points where a
pronoun would have been the obvious and best word to use, but that has
been avoided in relation to the second respondent given the nature of the
dispute between the parties over matters of gender and sex, the desire to
remain impartial when determining that dispute and the anticipation of
appellate proceedings referred to above.
The issues
31. The parties had agreed a List of Issues, later amended by them, and by
the Tribunal. The Tribunal has concluded that it is appropriate to conduct
its analysis by initially considering the main questions arising from the
case, as set out in the Discussion section below, and then by answering
the points raised by the List of Issues, as that was amended following the

4104864/2024 Page 10
Note on 24 September 2025. The Tribunal has also identified other
aspects of the issues the parties had themselves agreed, amending some
and making an addition, as it discusses below.
The evidence
(i) Documents
32. The parties had provided a Bundle of Documents extending initially to 719
pages for use during the Final Hearing when it commenced. On 7
February 2025 the claimant sought additional case management orders
to compel searches for documents said not to have been provided in
response to the orders of 3 January 2025. The respondents opposed the
application made. There was a lengthy debate on that issue taking most
of that day. The outcome was that the respondents provided further
documents voluntarily, and agreed to undertake searches over the
following weekend which resulted in additional documents being provided,
and no formal order was made. That resulted in further pages of evidence
being admitted of consent. Further documents were added later when it
emerged in cross examination that documents falling within the order
granted existed but which had not been produced.
33. There were a large number of documents not provided to the claimant that
ought to have been under the terms of the order granted on 3 January
2025, which had required compliance by 15 January 2025. Whilst that is
a reasonably short time-frame firstly for an organisation such as the first
respondent compliance was practicable, and secondly no application for
variation of the order was made at the time, nor was it appealed. When an
application to vary it was made later that was refused as referred to above.
34. The second respondent stated in evidence that the order had been
provided to the second respondent about two weeks prior to the first day
of the hearing, in one of the versions of the bundle of documents. That
was clarified to be after the date for compliance. That point was not raised
as a matter in re-examination. It is not clear which member of the
respondents’ legal team is responsible for the fact that a party
represented, who was one of those who were the subject of the order
referred to, did not see it until after the date for compliance had passed,
but it is wholly unacceptable that such a situation arose. The terms of the
order are clearly addressed to both respondents. The same solicitors from
the Central Legal Office of the NHS and the same counsel act for both
respondents. Instructions from the second respondent should have been
taken on the terms of the order as soon as it was issued.
35. So far as the first respondent is concerned, instructions should have been
taken and the order complied with both under the order itself and the terms
of the overriding objective in Rule 2 of the 2013 Rules, in force on the date

4104864/2024 Page 11
of the order, and then Rule 3 of the 2024 Rules which came into force on
6 January 2025. The terms of those Rules are in essentials the same.
36. Ms Russell, on instruction, stated initially to the Tribunal that Ms Davidson
was not an investigator and had only received one witness statement.
Emails produced by the first respondent after Ms Davidson had given
evidence appeared directly to contradict that, including those from Ms
Davidson herself, and one that on the face of it had been sent to her. It
appeared to the Tribunal that the comment by Ms Russell was at the very
least incomplete, although doubtless made on instruction. It had been
inferred if not directly suggested on behalf of the respondents that full
compliance with the order would not provide relevant evidence, but that
proved not to be accurate to a substantial extent. Much relevant evidence
that clearly fell within the order was not produced until very late indeed.
37. What the Tribunal regards as a wholly improper and large-scale lack of full
and appropriate compliance with the order for documents, which the
Tribunal addressed in the Note following the hearing on 17 March 2025
but which despite its terms appears not to have been timeously and
effectively acted upon by the first respondent thereafter, was a factor that
we took into account as set out below. For a public body such as the first
respondent not to comply with the orders granted by the Tribunal in such
a matter is concerning.
38. Further documents were, because of that history, added to the
documentation before the Tribunal in piecemeal fashion as the hearing
progressed, and latterly the documents extended to over 1,700 pages
(separately to that in the Supplementary Bundle for what the parties
described as research evidence as discussed below). That resulted in
documents not being in chronological order, and located in a patchwork of
different places. That in turn made ascertaining the facts materially more
difficult than it normally is, or ought reasonably to be. More significantly it
also meant that a substantial volume of documentation was latterly
available which had not been raised with the witnesses who had given
evidence during the initial days of hearing in February 2025, but who might
well have been asked about them had they been available, in particular
the second respondent and Ms Davidson.
39. Simply by way of two examples, the email from Dr Currer dated 5 January
2025 was latterly provided by the first respondent which suggested that
Ms Davidson, one of those to whom it was sent, should not conduct the
investigation as she had had discussions with the claimant before the
material events. It had an admittedly inaccurate comment that the claimant
had been referred to the NMC. It was not a document produced in
accordance with the order either timeously under the order, or during the
February hearing dates, but had been received by Ms Davidson and by
other prospective witnesses of the respondents. It was not addressed in

4104864/2024 Page 12
Ms Davidson’s evidence, and the claimant cannot be criticised for not
doing so as the document had not been provided to her. The evidential
difficulties of that matter not being put to Ms Davidson as her evidence
had been completed, there being no application for her to be recalled,
were not minor ones.
40. Secondly the claimant’s submission addressed in detail the evidence
related to the creation of notes on the second respondent’s mobile phone,
which it was argued had been interfered with by the second respondent
and demonstrated a lack of credibility, to paraphrase a lengthy aspect of
that submission. The material used for that included evidence provided by
Mr Donaldson of the first respondent, as noted below, by way of a
statement and documents referred to within it as well as orally, and the
written and oral evidence of Mr Borwick for the claimant in relation to that.
It followed events on 16 May 2025. That was after the second respondent
had given evidence. The claimant had not made similar applications when
seeking orders in November 2024 and only did so after she had closed
her own case. The allegations made by the claimant in this regard were
not therefore put directly to the second respondent, who has not given us
evidence about them. There was no application to recall the second
respondent.
41. These are not the only examples of difficulties created where evidence
was led before us on matters not raised with witnesses who could have
commented on them. They largely, but not entirely, result from a failure by
the respondents to comply with the order of 3 January 2025.
42. There was in addition to the main Bundles of Documents what was
described as a Supplementary Bundle extending latterly to a little over
1,000 pages comprising documents referred to in two written witness
statements from Ms Forstater and Mx Valentine referred to below, with a
supplementary statement and related documents from the latter added
latterly. That evidence is assessed and commented upon below.
43. Most but not all of the documents placed before the Tribunal were spoken
to in evidence. Where a document was not referred to in the oral evidence,
or within the statements of Ms Forstater or Mx Valentine, we did not
consider it, a matter further commented on below. It was simply a
document that had been tendered, and the risks of considering a
document only on that basis were illustrated by a dispute over a letter
dated 15 May 2024 that the first respondent said had been sent to the
claimant which the claimant said had not been received. The exception
to that is where there was email correspondence between the parties’
solicitors, which they had arranged for inclusion within the Bundle, some
of which was spoken to in evidence, and we inferred from these facts that
the parties had agreed that the emails between their representatives which
had been produced before us had been sent and received.

4104864/2024 Page 13
44. The parties had also agreed what was termed a Statement of Undisputed
Facts. In preliminary discussion it was explained that the matters stated
therein were agreed and it was taken on that basis as in effect a Statement
of Agreed Facts.
45. Various applications for orders were made by the claimant during the
course of the hearing, which were dealt with by separate Notes for them
as referred to above. The parties also produced additional documentation
including for example documentation provided by Mr Donaldson for the
respondents, and a report in part on the basis of those documents from
Mr Borwick for the claimant.
46. Evidence in chief was given orally, there being no order for use of written
witness statements, save for those witnesses permitted to do so as noted
below.
(ii) Witnesses for claimant
47. Evidence was given by the claimant herself which commenced on
3 February 2025 and she called as witnesses Ms Maya Forstater, whose
evidence in chief was given by written witness statement as had been
addressed in the Note following the closed Preliminary Hearing referred
to above, her husband Mr Darren Peggie, her daughter Ms Nicole Peggie,
and her mother Mrs Sheila Bell. The claimant closed her case on
5 February 2025.
48. Mr Jim Borwick was later called as an additional witness for the claimant,
and his evidence interposed during that of the respondents, with consent
of the respondents. He had prepared a written report. In addition, on 28
July 2025 the claimant sought leave both to be recalled herself, and to
lead two further witnesses Ms Emma Moore of Sex Matters and another
witness. The application was granted and Ms Moore was allowed to give
her evidence remotely as she is in London.
(iii) Witnesses for the respondents
49. The second respondent gave evidence commencing on 5 February 2025,
and for the first respondents the following witnesses were called: Ms
Esther Davidson who did so on 13 February 2025, and from 16 July 2025
and thereafter Ms Isla Bumba, Ms Gillian Malone, Dr Elspeth Pitt, Ms
Louise Curran, Ms Charlotte Myles, Dr Kate Searle, Ms Lauren Harris, Ms
Angela Glancey, Ms Anne Hamilton, Dr Margaret Currer, Mr Peter
Donaldson, Ms Fiona Wishart and Ms Lindsey Nicoll. The first respondent
tendered a written witness statement for Mr Donaldson, which was
received without opposition.
50. Mx V Valentine (who identifies as non-binary and for whom the title “Mx”
was used on request) had produced in addition to a written witness
statement on essentially the same basis as for Ms Forstater, a

4104864/2024 Page 14
Supplementary Statement with additional documents, received without
objection. The claimant later confirmed through her counsel that she did
not wish to cross examine Mx Valentine, and the evidence of that witness
was taken as read and as if given on oath, with the parties’ agreement.
(iv) General
51. There were a number of objections to questions during the evidence,
either determined at the time or often by allowing the question subject to
competency and relevancy. As an example, an objection concerned social
media posts made by the claimant’s husband, which the respondents
wished to put to the claimant. The Tribunal rejected an argument from Ms
Cunningham that that line was not permissible, given the width of the
latitude allowed in cross examination and that the matter might affect the
assessment of credibility or reliability to some extent, and the line of
questioning was allowed under reservation of issues of competency and
relevancy to be addressed in submission. In general, the parties were
allowed considerable latitude in how they presented their respective cases
both in evidence in chief and cross examination, but did not address the
detail where issues of competency and relevancy had been reserved in
their submissions.
52. The Tribunal asked some of the witnesses questions to elicit facts, doing
so under Rule 41 where it considered it appropriate to do so having regard
to the overriding objective in Rule 3.
53. The combination of these matters in relation to the evidence, and the
complicated procedural history outlined above, made conducting the Final
Hearing and determining the outcome particularly difficult, against the
background of what are in any event at least partly novel and complex
issues. The Tribunal allowed the parties very considerable latitude in the
manner in which they presented their cases given the nature of the issues
in dispute, which it considered appropriate under the overriding objective
in Rule 3.
Facts
54. The Tribunal considered all the evidence that was led, including that which
it has concluded was irrelevant to the issues before it and has not included
within the section on Facts which follows. The Tribunal took into account
the facts admitted in the pleadings as well as those in the Statement of
Agreed Facts. Certain facts were taken to be within judicial knowledge as
set out below, and as later addressed in the Discussion section. The
Tribunal found the following facts, which it considered were those material
to the issues before it, to have been established:
Parties

4104864/2024 Page 15
55. The claimant is Mrs Sandie Peggie. She is female.
56. The first respondent is Fife Health Board. It is one of fourteen territorial
Health Boards that make up NHS Scotland, alongside seven Special
Boards. The first respondent is a separate legal entity to the other Boards.
57. The first respondent is the board responsible for Victoria Hospital,
Kirkcaldy (“the hospital”). Within the hospital is an Accident and
Emergency Department, also called an Emergency Department (“the
department”).
58. The claimant had thirty years of experience as a nurse and she was 50
years of age at the material times for the purposes of this claim. She
worked in the department at all material times, and continues to do so.
59. The second respondent is Dr Elisabeth Upton. The second respondent is
known as Beth. The second respondent is a Junior Clinical Fellow, then
known as a junior doctor, at the early stages of a career as a doctor. The
second respondent was 28 years of age at the material times for the
purposes of this claim. The second respondent was provided with a birth
certificate stating sex as male shortly after birth.
60. The second respondent has identified as female since around January
2022, being fully open about that in public since around August 2022. The
second respondent since 2022 has used the female names of Elizabeth
and Beth, and female pronouns; has sought to have an appearance as a
female; has worn clothing that is consistent with what is generally
regarded as feminine in style; and has worn makeup in what is generally
regarded as feminine in style. The second respondent presents in what is
generally regarded as a feminine manner including as to having a long
hairstyle worn in what is generally regarded as feminine in style, and a
pitch and tone of voice consistent with that for a female. The second
respondent has been presenting as a female in such a manner since prior
to working at the hospital, and throughout the period since commencing
at the department.
61. The second respondent is not a person who is obviously male from
external appearance. Some people meeting the second respondent in a
work or social setting unaware of the sex assigned at birth for the second
respondent are likely to consider the second respondent to be of the
female sex. Other people meeting the second respondent in such
circumstances, or after more detailed interactions with the second
respondent, are likely to consider the second respondent as someone
assigned male by sex at birth.
62. The second respondent is about six feet tall. The claimant is about five
feet four inches tall.
The hospital

4104864/2024 Page 16
63. The hospital serves the town of Kirkcaldy and the area surrounding it. Staff
working at the hospital normally travel to and from the hospital in non-
working clothes. Doctors and nurses working there each require to wear a
uniform. The uniform is different for each, but essentially for each of those
roles involves a top and trousers. For doctors the uniform is maroon in
colour, and for nurses it is blue in colour. Other members of staff in
different roles also wear their own uniforms. The uniforms are the same
for men and women in each job role.
64. Staff working at the department were not required to change clothing, into
or out of uniforms, at any one particular place. Most staff used one of the
changing rooms described in the following paragraph. There are other
rooms for staff working in the department to use for changing clothing. In
the main building of the hospital, in the basement, there is one changing
room for females and another for males, which is situated further away
from the department than the said changing room in the department. In
the department there is a well-being room, which can be used by any
member of staff if vacant, which has a lockable door; a small room used
as a store area which also has a lockable door; and a separate set of
toilets for males and females. Use of those rooms allows the member of
staff to change clothing not in the presence of others.
The female changing room in the department
65. There are two rooms used by most staff working at the department to
change into and out of work clothing at the start and end of each shift, one
for males and one for females. Each has a sign on the door. The sign for
the female changing room states “female staff only”. It is located in an area
of the department to which access is gained by swipe card given only to
staff.
66. The female changing room in the department (“the changing room”) is a
room which is entered from only one door. The changing room measures
about 6 x 4 metres and can comfortably accommodate up to about six
members of staff. On entering the changing room through the door there
are benches with coat hooks above along a wall on the left hand side.
Immediately to the right hand side of the door is a bin, beside which is a
shoe rack. Along a wall on the right hand side from where the door is
located, and opposite the said benches, are a series of lockers. Beyond
the lockers on that wall are two sinks in a unit. At the wall on the opposite
side of the changing room from the door are two toilet cubicles, each with
a lockable door, situated perpendicularly to each other.
67. The changing room is used by several but not all of the female junior
doctors, nurses, and many of the auxiliaries, also known as Healthcare
Care Workers, working in the department. It has been used by the
claimant to do so for about twelve years, which was from the time that part
of the hospital was built.

4104864/2024 Page 17
68. The changing room had been designed as a locker room to store casual
clothing, footwear and other belongings. It also has two toilets. It was not
designed specifically as a changing room. The changing room formally
provided for female staff in the hospital as it had been designed is that in
the basement, and includes showers, but was not generally used by those
working in the department because of its location.
69. All bar one of the consultants working in the department did not use the
changing room to change clothes, but did so in rooms designated for
consultants situated in the department.
70. The claimant regularly but not invariably changed her clothes within one
of the two toilet cubicles in the changing room.
71. The second respondent normally changed clothing in the changing room
facing towards a wall.
72. Nurses and doctors work normally on different shift patterns, but on
occasion will end a shift at around the same time and use the same
changing room to change into or out of casual clothes both at the start and
end of shifts. They may also use the changing room during a shift to
access belongings stored there or to use the toilet within it.
Employment
73. The first respondent employed the claimant as a staff nurse in the
department. The claimant has been employed by the first respondent
since December 1994. She has worked on two night shifts per week since
May 2000. The nights when she worked varied week by week. Night shifts
start at 7.30pm and end at 8am.
74. The claimant had an unblemished disciplinary record with the first
respondent throughout the period of her employment, with no complaints
against her by other staff until after the incident on 24 December 2023
referred to below. No complaints have been made by any patient treated
by the claimant. The claimant has treated a number of patients who
identify as trans men or women.
75. The claimant travelled to work taking her work uniform with her to change
into on arrival. She washed her own uniform at home. For the claimant
changing into her uniform normally meant changing out of her top and
trousers and into her uniform top and trousers.
76. The second respondent was employed as a Junior Clinical Fellow (also
known as a junior doctor) in the department in August 2023. Prior to doing
so the second respondent had worked in the Psychiatry department of the
hospital, and had visited the department when in that role from time to
time. Prior to employment by the first respondent the second respondent
had been employed by Lothian Health Board. When in that employment

4104864/2024 Page 18
and after being fully open about reassigning gender to female the second
respondent had used the female changing room and toilet facilities without
issue or complaint.
77. The second respondent when applying for the role of Junior Clinical Fellow
had been interviewed by consultants for that. Several of the consultants in
the department were aware that the second respondent was a trans
woman from attending that interview. The second respondent separately
spoke to Dr Maggie Currer, a consultant in the department, shortly prior to
joining the department and stated that the second respondent was a trans
woman.
78. Each of the claimant and second respondent operated under a different
line management structure. The claimant’s line managers were within the
nursing structure, and were directly Ms Louise Curran and Ms Lauren
Harris, who reported to Ms Esther Davidson. They came under the overall
management of the Director of Nursing. The second respondent’s line
manager was Dr Melvin Carew, but on a day to day basis clinical
supervision of the second respondent was carried out by the consultant or
consultants working in the department at the time.
79. From the second respondent’s visits to the department prior to starting as
a Junior Clinical Fellow most of the staff working in the department were
aware of the second respondent being someone with the protected
characteristic of gender reassignment. No member of staff had raised any
concern formally or informally with any manager of the first respondent
about the second respondent whether with nursing line management or
medical line management prior to the claimant doing so informally in late
August 2023, as set out further below.
Claimant’s beliefs
80. The claimant believes that biological sex is real, important, and immutable,
and is not to be conflated with gender identity. She holds a belief both
referred to as “sex realist” and also as “gender-critical”. That includes a
belief that those who are biologically male, including trans women, are not
entitled to use female only spaces such as the changing room.
81. When the claimant first met the second respondent in August 2023 the
claimant believed that the second respondent was a male from hair worn
in a ponytail which appeared to the claimant to be receding, that the
second respondent was she thought taller than the average woman, the
second respondent being materially taller than the claimant, that the
second respondent had she thought a prominent Adam’s apple, and had
she thought large hands and feet.
Second respondent’s beliefs

4104864/2024 Page 19
82. The second respondent believes that the second respondent has the sex
and gender of a woman. The second respondent believed and understood
at the time of joining the department that the second respondent as a trans
woman had a right to use the female changing room in the department.
Policies
(a) NHS Scotland
83. NHS Scotland has a Workforce Conduct Policy. It has a provision as to
Suspension as follows:
“In all cases, suspension should be a last resort. The use of
suspension is not in itself a conduct action but does form part of
this policy. The manager should assess if there is a significant risk
to the organisation in areas such as clinical care, the safety of other
persons and/or any investigation.
Where these risks can be managed alternatives to suspension
should be used. These will include temporarily moving the
employee to another work area or considering other duties. Where
this is not possible suspension may be appropriate. For more
information, read the Guide to Suspension……”
84. It also had a provision for “Formal approach” as follows
“Where early resolution has not been successful, or in more serious
cases, a formal approach will be required.
Prior to any formal conduct process starting, a full and thorough
investigation must be carried out in line with the NHSScotland
Workforce Policies Investigation Process. This should be
undertaken in a timely manner to establish the facts of the
case……”
85. The Guide to Suspension included a list of situations where suspension
might be used, one of which was “Where allegations are made of bullying
or harassment and it is considered necessary for whatever reason that the
person under investigation cannot attend work.” It referred to providing a
Designated Contact Person for the suspended employee “to obtain advice
on the process and progress with their case.”
86. Under the heading “Terms of Suspension” it was stated that “the employee
must not contact or discuss with others the matter under investigation
without prior agreement by management.”
87. Under the heading “Guidelines for Suspension” it was stated that
“the employee’s line manager, or the responsible manager onsite,
will normally carry out the investigation…..

4104864/2024 Page 20
Suspension will always be for as short a period as is possible. In
some circumstances as set out above where the purpose of the
suspension is to take the heat out of the immediate situation, it may
not be necessary for the individual to remain on suspension until
the whole investigation is complete. Where ongoing suspension is
appropriate, the investigation should be completed, and if relevant
the conduct hearing held, within an agreed timescale. Ongoing
suspension must be reviewed on a regular basis in accordance with
the Suspension Record. Only in exceptional circumstances should
an employee be suspended for more than four calendar weeks, and
this must be discussed with the HR representative.”
88. NHS Scotland has a Workplace Policies Investigation Process. Under the
Pre-Investigation stage it is stated that “the manager should assess the
risk to determine whether alteration of duties or suspension is required”
The responsibilities of the manager of the employee under investigation
include “Advise employee at the earliest opportunity when they are subject
to investigation and why this is the case.”
89. It states that “an investigation team will be identified comprising an
investigating manager and an HR representative……In identifying the
team to undertake the investigation, the manager should consider the
complexity, nature and scale of the case. This will determine the level of
training and skill required of the investigating manager and the time
commitment to undertake the investigation in a timely manner. Taking into
account these factors it may be appropriate for the manager to undertake
the investigating manager role unless a conflict of interest has been
identified.”
90. There is a section on investigation team planning, which includes letters
being sent to the complainant and employee subject to a bullying and
harassment complaint where that arises to confirm that “they have been
appointed to undertake the investigation and offers to meet the individual
to hear their initial response to the allegations, making clear full allegations
and information will not be available at this stage.” It refers to a further
meeting being necessary. It states that following the meeting with the
person complained about “the investigating manager will provide a
provisional timescale for the completion of the investigation”.
91. The section headed “Investigation” states that “the investigation team will
collate and consider relevant documentation, including policies,
procedures and protocols. Witness investigation meetings are addressed,
with provision for notice and return of the written record of the meeting. An
investigation meeting with the employee is set out, of which at least 14
days’ notice is required. There is provision for a reconvened investigation
meeting. The factual findings of the investigation are to be provided in a
report, which has three potential findings (i) allegation not upheld

4104864/2024 Page 21
(ii) learning outcomes or (iii) referral to a formal panel under the relevant
NHS Scotland Workforce Policy.
92. NHS Scotland has a Bullying and Harassment Policy. Under the heading
of “Examples of harassing behaviours” and sub-heading “harassment can
be related to” it is stated that harassment can be related to gender
reassignment and sex/gender, amongst others. An Appendix includes
examples of harassing behaviours, within which was
“Types of harassing behaviour:
“The most common forms of harassment are listed below and are
specifically directed towards the protected/personal
characteristic(s). This can be one significant incident or an ongoing
pattern of behaviour. This is not an exhaustive list.
• Offensive jokes, banter and comments…….
• Use of derogatory terms
• Inappropriate personal questions/comments……….
• Deliberate and consistent behaviours which demonstrate a
non-acceptance of aspects relating to a protected or
personal characteristic(s) e.g. failure to use requested
gender pronouns for a transitioning individual.”
93. The Policy states that “If Early Resolution is unsuccessful or the bullying
or harassing behaviour is significant or persistent in nature, the employee
or manager may initiate the Formal Procedure” and then provides:
“In such cases, the manager will assess any risk. They will
determine what supports can be put in place to allow the employees
to continue working together during this period, such as alternate
shift patterns.
Where this is inappropriate, the employee alleged to have
demonstrated the bullying or harassing behaviours or both will be
moved to an alternate placement unless:
• the complainant requests a move
• there is a legitimate service need which dictates that the other
employee cannot be moved
To initiate the Formal Procedure, the employee should write to their
manager. Where this is not possible, or appropriate, they should
write to the next level of management.
The communication should detail the employee or employees
alleged to be demonstrating the behaviours and their nature. For
more information, read the guide for employee complainants.

4104864/2024 Page 22
The employee may access a-confidential contact or HR for advice,
or a trade union representative for support and assistance.
If the employee has chosen to go straight to the formal stage of the
procedure, a manager will:
• discuss with the employee why they think Early Resolution is not
appropriate
• offer every support to allow Early Resolution to take place
The manager who receives the complaint must acknowledge the
complaint in writing within 7 calendar days. The Standard
acknowledgement letter template is used. The letter outlines the
process for either revisiting the possibility of Early Resolution or the
process of investigation to be undertaken in line with the
NHSScotland Workforce Policies Investigation Process.”
94. There is an NHS Scotland Workforce Conduct Policy Guide to Suspension
which includes that “Before deciding to suspend an employee, the
manager should assess the degree of risk involved……Where practicable,
employees should be given reasonable notice to organise representation.”
It had links to documents for two checklists but not to a written risk
assessment document.
95. There is an NHS Scotland Workforce Grievance Policy [which was not
before the Tribunal]. The said NHS Scotland policies have been adopted
by the first respondent.
(b) First respondent
96. The first respondent has an Equality, Diversity & Human Rights Policy
(“the EDHR policy”). Its provisions include the following:
“5. AIM OF POLICY/ PRINCIPLES AND VALUES
This policy sets out the aims of NHS Fife to:
• Eliminate unlawful discrimination, harassment and victimisation
and other conduct prohibited by the Equality Act 2010 and less
favourable treatment (directly or indirectly) of other categories of
worker as set out within other relevant legislation;
• Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a
protected characteristic (i.e. age, disability, gender reassignment,
marriage and civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity, race,
religion or belief, sex or sexual orientation) and those who do not;
• Foster good relations between people who share a protected
characteristic and those who do not; and

4104864/2024 Page 23
• Ensure that the organisation has due regard for the European
Convention of Human Rights (ECHR) in the discharge of its
function.
6. PRINCIPLES AND VALUES
The following principles and values are key to the achievement of
these aims:
• Equality, diversity and human rights must be at the heart of NHS
Fife and everything it does;
• Disadvantages experienced by people due to their protected
characteristics will be removed or minimized in order to create an
environment in which individual differences and the contributions of
all staff are recognised and valued;
• Steps will be taken to meet the needs of people from protected
groups where these are different from the needs of those not in
protected groups.
• Steps will be taken to reduce underrepresentation of people with
particular protected characteristics and increase the diversity of our
workforce, both at an organisational level and within different job
roles;
• A zero tolerance approach will be taken to intimidation, bullying or
harassment, recognising that all staff are entitled to a working
environment that promotes dignity and respect for all;
• NHS Fife will act as an agent for change within local communities
by positioning equality, diversity and human rights at the heart of
local delivery plans;
• Whilst this will be achieved in part by being championed at a
senior level, it can only be fully achieved through all those working
within NHS Fife recognizing and adhering to their own personal
responsibilities in this regard, and NHS Fife will therefore take steps
to ensure that everyone in the organisation understands their rights
and responsibilities under this policy;
• NHS Fife will ensure that arrangements are in place to support
staff who have equality, diversity and human rights issues;
• Equality and diversity monitoring will be undertaken on a regular
basis, with resulting improvement actions being identified and
achieved; and
• This policy will be subject to ongoing monitoring to ensure that it
is being fairly and consistently applied and that the stated principles

4104864/2024 Page 24
and values are being met. The policy will be subject to regular
review, in partnership, to ensure that it remains fit for
purpose……….”
“If a member of staff is undergoing gender reassignment, NHS Fife
will consult with them sensitively about their needs in the workplace
and whether there are any reasonable and practical steps that can
be taken to help them as they undergo their gender reassignment
process;……..
8. REMEDIES
NHS Fife will not tolerate behaviours that may constitute
discrimination, harassment or victimisation of its staff in the course
of their employment, nor will it tolerate such behaviour by its staff
whether directed against colleagues or other people with whom
they come into contact during the course of their employment.
Staff should be encouraged to report any such incidents via DATIX,
and have access to the NHS Scotland Bullying and Harassment
policy and processes available to progress concerns. Managers
can also instigate an investigation into concerns raised.
All staff must adhere to this policy, and failure to do so may lead to
disciplinary action.
8.1 Grievances
Any member of staff who believes that they have been treated less
favourably because of their age, disability, gender reassignment,
marriage and civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity, race,
religion or belief, sex, sexual orientation, part-time status, fixed-
term contract status or membership (or non-membership) of a trade
union/ professional organisation is encouraged to raise the matter
through NHS Scotland Workforce grievance policy [hyperlink
added].
8.2 Harassment
If the complaint is about harassment or victimisation, then the staff
member should raise the matter using NHS Scotland Workforce
Bullying and Harassment Policy. Bullying and Harassment Policy
[hyperlink added]
8.3 Dealing with Grievances / Harassment
It is the policy of NHS Fife to ensure that:
• Where a complaint is received, staff are not discriminated against
in the way that the organisation responds to it;

4104864/2024 Page 25
• Such matters will be taken seriously and investigated promptly
and not dismissed as "over-sensitivity" or "workplace culture" on
the part of the member of staff;
• The matter will be thoroughly investigated using NHS Scotland
Workforce Policies Investigation Process, and where an
investigation recommends that a conduct process is appropriate,
the individual against whom allegations have been made will be
given a fair hearing; and
• Members of staff who have raised allegations in good faith,
regardless of whether or not they are upheld, and members of staff
who have participated in the process, (eg as a witness), must not
be subject to any detriment because of having done so…………”
97. The first respondent has an Employees Guide to Responding to Hate
Incidents. It defines a hate incident as “an incident which is perceived by
the victim or any other person as being motivated by prejudice, hatred or
ill-will towards any identifiable person or social group.” It states that “a hate
incident can take on many forms and there is no definitive list, rather the
matter is subject to interpretation based on the victim’s perception.” It
includes “harassment, bullying or victimisation (harassment is behaviour
that is intimidating, upsetting, embarrassing humiliating or offensive.” It
further states that “NHS Fife staff must record all Hate Incidents and where
appropriate report the incident to the Police……” Hate crime is defined as
including “harassment, bullying or victimisation (Harassment is behaviour
that is intimidating, upsetting, embarrassing, humiliating or offensive)”.
(c) NMC
98. The Nursing & Midwifery Council (“NMC”) is the regulator for nurses, and
has issued a Code titled “Professional standards of practice and behaviour
for nurses, midwives and nursing associates”. Under the heading
“Prioritise people” the following is stated after an introductory paragraph:
“1. Treat people as individuals and uphold their dignity
To achieve this, you must:
1.1 treat people with kindness, respect and compassion…….
1.3 avoid making assumptions and recognise diversity and
individual choice…..
1.5 respect and uphold people’s human rights”
99. Under the heading “Promote professionalism and trust” after an
introductory paragraph is stated:
“20. Uphold the reputation of your profession at all times

4104864/2024 Page 26
To achieve this, you must………
20.2 act with honesty and integrity at all times, treating people fairly
and without discrimination, bullying or harassment
20.3 be aware at all times of how your behaviour can affect and
influence the behaviour of other people…….
20.7 make sure you do not express your personal beliefs (including
political, religious or moral beliefs) to people in an inappropriate
way……”
(d) No written policy regarding trans people or staff
100. The first respondent did not have a written policy with regard to trans staff,
being those with the protected characteristic of gender reassignment
under the Equality Act 2010, as at August 2023 and as at July 2025
continues not to have such a written policy.
101. Ms Isla Bumba, the Equality & Human Rights Lead Officer (Patient
Experience Team) of the first respondent was asked to prepare a policy
for trans patients [on a date not given in evidence, but likely to have been
around the spring of 2024]. She considered the terms of paragraph 13.57
of the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) Code of Practice:
Services, Public Functions and Associations (“CoP: Services”) to do so.
She also considered the policies of other NHS Scotland Boards, including
that of NHS Lanarkshire, and spoke to her equivalents in some of those
Boards. She reviewed policies from some NHS Trusts in England. She
was aware that NHS Scotland was considering developing a “Once for
Scotland” policy with regard to trans staff which the first respondent would,
once it had been prepared, adopt.
102. NHS Scotland has not formally issued any such policy as at July 2025.
August 2023
103. Shortly before the second respondent started to work in the department,
in or around late July 2023, Dr Currer, a consultant in the department,
sought advice from Ms Bumba about the use of a changing room by a
trans person, without identifying the second respondent as being that
person. Ms Bumba gave general advice that a trans person should use
the changing room for the gender that they identified as having, or words
to that effect.
104. The second respondent commenced work in the role of Junior Clinical
Fellow in the department on 2 August 2023. On arrival an induction was
provided which included showing the second respondent where the male
and female changing rooms were, but without specific direction in relation
to which of those the second respondent should use. The second
respondent said during that induction that the second respondent believed

4104864/2024 Page 27
that the second respondent had the right to use the female changing room
as a trans woman.
105. The second respondent used the female changing room in the department
from the time of commencement to work in it.
106. The second respondent met Dr Kate Searle, Consultant in Emergency
Medicine, on or around 16 August 2023 as part of the induction process.
Dr Searle was the second respondent’s clinical and educational
supervisor. Her role as such included providing support for the well-being
of the second respondent. There was a discussion between them about
use of facilities including changing rooms. Dr Searle had undertaken
research into the matter. She had considered paragraph 13.57 of the CoP:
Services, and took that to mean that the second respondent had the right
to use the changing room of the gender the second respondent presented
in, being female. She was not aware of any other policy of the second
respondent or NHS Scotland on trans staff. She did not consider that
excluding the second respondent from that room would be a proportionate
means of achieving a legitimate aim. She was unaware of any concerns
or complaints from any staff over the second respondent using the female
changing room from visits the second respondent had made to the
department before joining it. She considered that the second respondent
should use the female changing room if the second respondent so wished.
107. Dr Searle asked the second respondent if the second respondent was
happy to use the female changing room. The second respondent said yes.
The second respondent considered that permission had been given to do
so from that exchange.
108. The giving of that permission was not communicated to other members of
staff at the department. Many members of staff were aware of the second
respondent using the female changing room. Save by the claimant as
referred to below, no member of staff raised any concern or complaint with
any manager of the first respondent as to the use of the female changing
room from August 2023 onwards.
109. A group of about five members of staff including the clamant had private
discussions with regard to the second respondent’s use of the female
changing room between themselves in around August and September
2023. That group included one male member of staff and three female
members of staff, as well as the claimant.
First incident
110. On or about 26 August 2023 the claimant entered the female changing
room at about 8am, which was at the end of her shift, to change out of her
work clothes. When she entered the changing room the second
respondent was already there, sitting down and putting on shoes. The

4104864/2024 Page 28
claimant felt embarrassed by the presence of the second respondent who
she perceived to be male, in the room where she was intending to change
out of her uniform into her non-work clothes which required partial
undressing, and the claimant left the changing room. She waited outside
it until the second respondent left it. She then entered the changing room,
changed her clothes and left the hospital.
111. The second respondent considered that the claimant’s behaviour in
entering and then leaving in such a manner had been unusual. The
second respondent felt sad that the incident had happened, but
considered that that was the way that the claimant was dealing with the
second respondent and did not discuss it with anyone at that time.
112. Later the same day the claimant sent a message to a colleague stating
“The trans doctor was in the middle of getting changed when I went in this
morning. I thought Chris was winding me up.” The reference to Chris was
to a colleague who had told the claimant that the second respondent was
using the female changing room. Her colleague replied that “you have
made my night” with laughing emojis. The claimant replied to that stating
“OMG IT WAS NOT FUNNY. I just looked at him and come back out lol.
Don’t think it’s right though. Don’t mind him her but I would have been
raging if he had walked in on me half naked.” By “lol” the claimant meant
laugh out loud.
Claimant’s first discussion with Ms Davidson
113. On or about 27 August 2023 the claimant spoke with Ms Davidson who
was the Acting Clinical Nurse Manager, having very recently been
appointed to that role from being a Senior Charge Nurse. The claimant
told her that she was unhappy that a person she regarded as a man was
being given access to the female changing room, and told her about the
incident on 26 August 2023. She explained that the incident had left her
feeling awkward, embarrassed, and uncomfortable. Ms Davidson told the
claimant something to the effect that she would look into it, and that the
claimant could change in the toilets in the changing room so as not to get
undressed in front of a colleague.
114. Ms Davidson sought advice from Ms Bumba by telephone or by a Teams
call that same day, or on the following day. Ms Davidson explained that
there was a trans female member of staff who had started at the
department, that another member of staff was uncomfortable with that,
without giving details of name or role of either of them, and sought advice
including whether there was any policy. Ms Bumba said that there was no
written policy and advised her to the effect that, because the person was
a trans woman and identified as a woman, that the person had the right to
use the female changing room.

4104864/2024 Page 29
115. Ms Bumba gave that advice as it was her understanding from a review of
policies from several other Boards in Scotland, and NHS Trusts in
England, and how they addressed the use of facilities by trans staff,
including changing rooms and toilets, as well as her understanding of
paragraph 13.57 of the CoP: Services. She considered that that applied
to members of staff using staff only facilities.
116. One of the policies from another Board she considered was that of NHS
Lanarkshire. The policy was titled “Supporting Trans Staff in the
Workplace”, which included the following provision:
“4.7 Use of Toilets, Showers and Changing Facilities
The use of changing/showering facilities and toilets will be part of
the discussion process with the member of staff transitioning to
their affirmed gender with a view to agreeing the point at which the
use of facilities should change from one gender to another.
Should there be any objections to this by other staff, the objections
will be dealt with by the manager in a sensitive and understanding
way while not denying the Trans staff member access to facilities
appropriate to their lived gender. It would not be acceptable to
expect an individual undergoing transition to use facilities for use
by the gender they were assigned at birth. It is not good practice to
allocate specific facilities for the individual who is transitioning.”
117. The wording of the other policies she considered was different in detail but
very broadly similar in nature to that in the preceding paragraph. She
believed from her review of those policies and the discussion with those
in similar positions to her in other Boards and Trusts that the position
adopted across the NHS in Great Britain was to the effect that a member
of staff with the protected characteristic of gender reassignment had the
right to use a changing room that aligned with the gender they identified
as having.
118. The first respondent did not conduct an equality impact assessment in
relation to the use by the second respondent of the changing room either
around then or at any other stage.
119. Ms Davidson carried out her own research separately into the matter of
use of a changing room by a trans member of staff. She made a search
on the first respondent’s online system called “Blink” which has all the first
respondent’s policies accessible for staff to view. It includes those of NHS
Scotland which the first respondent has adopted for use. There was no
specific policy with regard to trans persons she found. She read the first
respondent’s Equality, Diversity and Human Rights Policy, and other
policies, being the Workforce Policy, the first respondents’ Principles and
Values Policy and the Nurses Midwifery Council Code of Conduct. She

4104864/2024 Page 30
spoke with a Consultant in the department Dr Maggie Currer who told her
that she had received the same advice from Ms Bumba that a trans female
member of staff had the right to use the female changing room.
120. Mr Jamie Doyle, then a Clinical Nurse Manager of the first respondent,
was consulted by Ms Davidson about the position, and he spoke to
Ms Bumba about it. He then emailed Ms Angie Shepherd, Service
Manager; Ms Gillian Malone, Head of Nursing; Ms Davidson and
Ms Curran, who was a Charge Nurse and one of two line managers for
the claimant, on 29 August 2023 and stated that he had contacted Ms
Bumba. He recorded that she had given advice to Ms Currer. The email
recorded the advice as:
• “Check in with staff member and see if there is any supports we
need to consider as appropriate
• There is no NHS policy for staff on this as yet, there is a patient
policy being produced just now which will support the staff policy
• NHS Fife only has gender neutral facilities within the NTC
currently
• We could consider transgender awareness training for our team
which could support the allegation of concerns and answer
questions that the team may have
• As the staff member identifies as a woman, access to female
only facilities would be seen as her right.”
121. Dr Currer and Ms Davidson had a meeting [on a date not given in evidence
but likely to have been in late August or early September 2023] when they
confirmed that each had been given similar advice by Ms Bumba.
122. Ms Davidson and the claimant worked on opposite shift patterns, and
Ms Davidson was on holiday for much of September 2023. Ms Davidson
did not relay the advice she had received from Ms Bumba until late
October 2023 as referred to below.
October 2023
123. In about early October 2023 the claimant spoke to Ms Curran stating that
she had spoken to Ms Davidson earlier but wished to make her aware also
that she was not happy with the second respondent using the changing
room, and did not feel that it was right. Ms Curran was aware of the earlier
conversation and advice from Ms Bumba having been told that by
Ms Davidson, and informed the claimant of that. Ms Curran advised the
claimant that there were alternative changing facilities in the basement of
the main Phase 2 building, and a well-being room in the department with

4104864/2024 Page 31
a locked door available to all staff. She said she would raise the claimant’s
concerns with Ms Davidson.
124. Ms Curran spoke to Ms Davidson shortly thereafter and asked if there was
any update. Ms Davidson said that there was not and that Ms Bumba’s
advice still stood. Ms Curran was not on shift again with the claimant in
the period up to the Christmas Eve incident referred to below.
125. On or around 23 October 2023 the second respondent met Dr Searle to
discuss how matters had been going at work. The second respondent
mentioned the first incident, which they discussed. Dr Searle said that it
was unpleasant for the second respondent or words to that effect and
asked the second respondent if the second respondent wished the
claimant to be spoken to. The second respondent stated that the second
respondent did not wish to do so or go down any formal process. The
second respondent had informed Dr Searle of the matter in order that she
was aware of it in the event that there was any later escalation.
The second incident
126. On 25 October 2023 the claimant was in the changing room changing her
clothes. The second respondent entered the room. At the time the
claimant was dressed in her bra and trousers. The claimant was
embarrassed by the presence of a person she regarded as a man in the
room where she was undressing. She replaced her top and left the
changing room. She waited outside until the second respondent left. She
then re-entered it and completed changing.
127. The second respondent was aware of the claimant’s actions in leaving the
changing room and waiting outside it, and prepared a note of the
circumstances of the incident as the second respondent considered it to
be on a mobile phone on 26 October 2023. When doing so the second
respondent also made a record of the incident on or around 26 August
2023. The second respondent thought that the second incident was part
of a pattern, but decided not to do anything about it if matters stayed at
the same level. It was not reported to anyone at that time by the second
respondent.
Claimant’s second discussion with Ms Davidson
128. At or around the end of October 2023 the claimant spoke to Ms Davidson
again, and asked her what she had done after the discussion they had
held after the first incident. Ms Davidson told her that she had telephoned
Equality & Diversity, by which she meant Ms Bumba, and been told that
she had found nothing to support excluding the second respondent from
the changing room. The claimant said that she was very unhappy that a
person she regarded as a man was being given access to a female
changing room. The claimant was obviously upset and angered by the

4104864/2024 Page 32
reply from Ms Davidson. Ms Davidson proposed that the claimant could
use alternative changing areas including the toilet cubicle of the changing
room or the said store room. The claimant said that she would not change
in the toilet cubicle. Ms Davidson also said that there were other places
the claimant could use to change, being a well-being room and the
changing room in the main building.
129. The claimant understood from that conversation that the second
respondent had received permission from the first respondent to use the
changing room.
130. At some point around the end of October 2023 a meeting was held
between consultants and senior nurses, as was done on around a monthly
basis. The circumstances of the second respondent and use of the
changing room were raised, it was explained that a complaint had been
raised by a nurse about it. It was stated that the advice received from
Equality and Diversity (a reference to Ms Bumba) was that the second
respondent had the right to use the changing room.
Resus room
131. In or around November 2023 the claimant and second respondent were
working in the resuscitation area (known as the “resus” room) of the
department. The second respondent was with a patient. The claimant
came in to where the patient was, and the second respondent expected
her to undertake normal observations. The claimant asked the second
respondent to do so. The claimant then left that area. The second
respondent did not make any record of what had happened on the said
mobile phone nor report it to anyone.
December 2023
132. On 8 December 2023 the second respondent orally raised concerns with
Dr Searle over the claimant’s interactions with the second respondent
during the said three incidents. Dr Searle emailed Ms Bumba that day to
refer to the department having its first transgender doctor, and asking if
there was “any information/policies for transgender staff (particularly
regarding changing areas/toilets)?” Ms Bumba replied on 11 December
2023 to state that there were no policies or guidance for trans staff at the
first respondent but said that it was expected that there would be an NHS
Scotland policy on that soon.
Child patient incident
133. On 18 December 2023 the second respondent and claimant were both
working in the department. A child patient had originally presented and
had been triaged by the claimant, and asked to wait in the waiting room.
The second respondent later called that patient’s name, but discovered
that the patient had left. The second respondent wished to find out the

4104864/2024 Page 33
circumstances of the patient and noted from the records that the claimant
had carried out the triage. The second respondent sought to find the
claimant without success, and a Healthcare Worker Ms Rehanna Ashraf
offered to look for her. Ms Ashraf and the claimant then came to where the
second respondent was in the department. Ms Ashraf asked the claimant
in the second respondent’s presence if there had been any concerns
about the child patient. The claimant said that she had no concerns. The
second respondent said thanks and added that the second respondent
had needed to know for a letter to be sent recording what had happened.
The claimant left the area.
134. The second respondent recorded the matter in the said mobile phone later
that day stating: “Working nights, won’t make eye contact, won’t
acknowledge my present [sic]. Not had a direct conversation yet but I can
feel the dismissal/hostility.”
The Christmas Eve incident
135. On 24 December 2023, Christmas Eve, the second respondent worked a
shift which commenced at 2pm and lasted until midnight. The claimant
was working a night shift starting at 7.30pm that day and due to last until
8am on 25 December 2023, Christmas Day.
136. Towards the end of the shift the second respondent went round the
department to wish colleagues a merry Christmas, and wrote a message
to others. Shortly before midnight the second respondent went into the
changing room to change in order to go home. The second respondent
was wearing work uniform known as “scrubs”. Two other female members
of staff also entered the changing room at about the same time; one a GP
in training the second respondent knew only as Shwayts, and the other an
emergency nurse practitioner Ms Fiona Wishart. They were wearing their
uniforms. All three entered the changing room in order to change out of
uniforms at the end of their shifts. All three of them changed into casual
clothes.
137. At very approximately the same time the claimant who was working at a
computer, noticed that she had had heavy menstrual bleeding, was
concerned that it might be visible to others and wished to change her
clothing. The claimant walked to the female changing room to change.
She kept spare clothing in her locker there. She intended to change her
clothes in the toilet cubicle within the changing room.
138. As the claimant entered the changing room the said three persons were
still present being the second respondent, the person named Shwayts and
Ms Wishart, each of whom had completed changing into casual clothes.
The claimant’s locker was at the end of the lockers which were in a line,
furthest from the door and next to two sinks. The claimant stood beside
her locker and spoke to Ms Wishart for a short time. She did not speak to

4104864/2024 Page 34
the second respondent when doing so. The second respondent’s locker
was in the same line of lockers and situated closer to the door.
139. At about that time or shortly afterwards Shwayts left the changing room to
go home. The second respondent then went into the toilet cubicle situated
nearer to the sinks, wearing casual clothes. The toilets are on the opposite
side of the changing room to the door. Whilst the second respondent was
in the toilet Ms Wishart left the changing room to go home. The claimant
at that time was alone in the changing room, with the second respondent
still in the toilet cubicle. The second toilet cubicle situated nearer to the
bench in the changing room was vacant.
140. The second respondent came out of the toilet cubicle and went to one of
the sinks. The second respondent started washing hands. The claimant at
that point was standing near her said locker, and was nearer to the door
than where the second respondent was standing. The claimant initiated a
conversation between them.
141. The claimant told the second respondent that she did not think that it was
appropriate for the second respondent to use the changing room. She
explained that she felt intimidated because of the presence of the second
respondent, who she said was a man, in the women’s changing room, that
the second respondent could not be in it, it was wrong, and lots of others
felt that way. The second respondent said that the second respondent was
very sorry she felt intimidated but had been told that the second
respondent could change there. The claimant said that she had no
problem with the second respondent, that she understood that the second
respondent was going through some process but the second respondent
was not a woman and could not be in there.
142. At some point during the conversation [precisely when was not identified
in the evidence] the second respondent moved from the area by the sink
to collect the second respondent’s bag. The second respondent walked
around the claimant to do so, after which the second respondent was
closer to the door than the claimant was.
143. The claimant asked the second respondent “what are your
chromosomes?” The second respondent did not answer that question.
The second respondent repeated being sorry that the claimant was
intimidated but that the second respondent was a woman and allowed to
use the space, and said that if the claimant had concerns could she raise
them formally as the second respondent did not think that this was the
most appropriate time, place or process for the conversation. The claimant
repeated that she was intimidated, that lots of people were talking about it
and are all intimidated by the second respondent. The claimant repeated
that the second respondent was not a woman. The second respondent
stated that no one else had raised a concern but that if they did have a

4104864/2024 Page 35
concern the second respondent hoped that they would raise them through
the proper channels or come to the second respondent to raise them.
144. The claimant said that maybe she was the only one who felt able to, that
she would not change in front of men because she had a bad history with
men. The second respondent started to say that the second respondent
understood and sympathised. The claimant interrupted the second
respondent and said that the second respondent did not understand or
sympathise enough or would not be changing in the changing room. The
second respondent repeated that the second respondent was sorry the
claimant was intimidated but did not wish to have the conversation there,
did not think that that was appropriate, and that if she or others had
concerns to raise them formally. The second respondent said that there
were protocols to follow if the claimant was unhappy. The second
respondent said that the second respondent was not sure what could be
done to resolve the matter, repeating the comment about being sorry the
claimant felt intimidated.
145. The claimant said that the second respondent could not change in the
changing room and that it would help if the second respondent did not do
so. She said that women have a right to feel safe and that it was just like
that person in the prisons. That was a reference to the case of Isla
Bryson/Adam Graham.
146. The second respondent repeated that this was an inappropriate time, that
the second respondent did not wish to talk to her about it now, and did not
think that a discussion between two people at the end of a long shift was
productive or the best way to resolve matters. The claimant repeated her
concerns and the second respondent repeated the comments about
appropriate channels and having a formal conversation. The claimant said
that she would raise the matter and the second respondent then left the
changing room. The claimant remained in the changing room.
147. The claimant and second respondent were facing each other throughout
almost all of the exchanges between them. During the latter part of their
discussion [at a time not specified in evidence] the second respondent put
on a jacket.
148. At no point did the second respondent touch the claimant or the claimant
touch the second respondent. Neither the claimant nor second respondent
raised their voices. The exchange between them took approximately five
minutes, and concluded just after midnight on 24 – 25 December 2023.
149. The claimant felt extremely nervous throughout the exchange but did not
articulate that to the second respondent save by reference to feeling
intimidated. She felt intimidated by the presence in the changing room of
a person she perceived to be male. She felt embarrassed that the bleeding
that had taken place may have been visible to others.

4104864/2024 Page 36
150. The second respondent felt attacked and distressed by the exchange with
the claimant including the language used, the comment that the second
respondent was a man not a woman and could not use the changing room,
the question as to chromosomes, and what was taken by the second
respondent to be a comparison with a rapist, but did not articulate that to
the claimant.
Second respondent’s meeting with Dr Pitt
151. Immediately after the second respondent left the changing room, the
second respondent went to find a consultant colleague Dr Elspeth Pitt.
Dr Pitt was the consultant who had been working at the department, and
whose shift ended at midnight after which she was to be on call.
152. It took about five minutes for the second respondent to locate her. The
second respondent looked shaken, was visibly distressed and upset, and
presented as startled to Dr Pitt. They went into the well-being room in the
department. The second respondent reported the events in the changing
room to her. When doing so the second respondent was very distressed,
it appeared to Dr Pitt that the second respondent was fearful, and the
second respondent was sobbing. The second respondent stated that the
second respondent had had a very unpleasant and painful conversation
with the claimant at the end of the second respondent’s shift; that the
claimant had said that the second respondent should not be in the
changing room; that the claimant had likened the situation to that involving
a convicted rapist; that the second respondent had felt cornered; that it
had escalated and the second respondent could not get away and that the
second respondent felt very upset at what had been said by the claimant.
153. Dr Pitt listened to the second respondent and provided comfort. She gave
advice to the second respondent including peer support from the British
Medical Association, and to write a factual account of what had happened.
154. Their discussion lasted about thirty minutes. As the second respondent
was fearful Dr Pitt suggested that the second respondent go home, and
walked out to the second respondent’s car with the second respondent in
case there was an encounter with the claimant. There was no such
encounter, and after preparing an initial note of the discussion on the
second respondent’s mobile telephone using an application called Google
Notes, doing so for several minutes around 00.45am, the second
respondent drove home.
155. Dr Pitt sent an email to Dr Searle and Ms Davidson at 00.48am on
25 December 2023 with reference to the incident and stating that the
second respondent had “had a very upsetting interaction with another
member of staff.” She did so as she was in her car about to go home, and
shorty after her discussion with the second respondent had concluded.

4104864/2024 Page 37
156. The second respondent arrived home at around 1.50am. The second
respondent made a change to the note made on 18 December 2023 by
adding:
“Needed to ask Sandie a question about a child patient who left
before being seen as she had triaged them. Couldn’t find her. HCA
(Rihanna) offered to look for her. Both came back, Rihanna asked
Sandie if any concerns while both were in front of me. Sandie didn’t
look or otherwise engage with me. Responded she had no
concerns. I said thanks and that I needed to know for the letter. She
did not acknowledge me either through words or eye contact and
left the area.”
157. The second respondent made further entries in relation to the exchange
with the claimant on Christmas Eve and into Christmas Day 2023. [The
detail of which part of the notes was prepared when is accurately set out
in the written report from Mr Borwick.]
158. The claimant continued to work for the remainder of her shift. She met
Ms Curran in the period after the incident with the second respondent and
before the claimant completed her shift. The claimant made no mention of
the incident to Ms Curran. The claimant appeared to Ms Curran to have a
demeanour that was unchanged from that exhibited by her prior to the
incident during the earlier part of that shift.
Email to Dr Searle
159. The second respondent sent an email to Dr Searle at 03.17am on
25 December 2023 setting out what was described as a summary of the
events to the best of recollection. It stated the following:
“Summary
Myself another junior doctor and one of the ENPs were in the
changing room. We were all chatting, and Sandie came in. I thought
this was unusual as Sandie often leaves when I am in the changing
room. I went to the bathroom, and the others left, apart from Sandie.
I left the cubicle and she was still in the changing room. I started
washing my hands and she started talking to me, saying she
doesn't think it's appropriate that I use the changing room. She said
she feels intimidated by me. Stated it's the women's changing
room, I can't be in here, it's wrong and that lots of others feel this
way. I explained I'm very sorry she feels intimidated but I've been
told I can change here. She kept telling me she finds me
intimidating. She stated she has no problem with me and
understands I'm going through 'some process' but I'm not a woman
and I can't be in here. She asked me 'What are your
chromosomes?'. I explained I'm sorry she is intimidated but I am a

4104864/2024 Page 38
woman and I am allowed to use this space. If she has concerns
could she please raise them formally as I do not think this is the
most appropriate time, place or process for this conversation.
She continued to tell me she is intimidated and that lots of people
are talking about it and are all intimidated by me. She told me I'm
not a woman. I said that no one else has raised a concern with me
but I would hope if they had concerns they would raise them
formally through the proper channels or come to me with those
concerns. She stated maybe she's the only one who feels able to.
She told me she wouldn't change in front of men because she has
a bad history with men. I said I understand and sympathise. She
cut me off and says I don't understand and don't sympathise
enough or I wouldn't be changing in this changing room. I again
stated I'm sorry she is intimidated but I do not want to have this
conversation here, I don't think it's appropriate, if she or others have
concerns they should raise it formally. I told her I'm not sure what I
can do to resolve this, I'm sorry she feels intimidated. She told me
I could not change here and that would help. She told me women
have a right to feel safe, she said 'its just like that person in the
prisons'.
I again told her this is an inappropriate time, I do not wish to talk to
her about it now, I don't think a discussion between two people at
the end of a long shift is productive or the best way to resolve this.
She wouldn't let it go, we went back and forth a few times for about
a minute, each time I repeated my previous statement about
appropriate channels and formal conversation. Eventually she told
me 'she will raise this' and I then left the changing room…..”
160. It included that:
“I’m not really sure what the next steps are to improve/resolve the
situation. To be honest the whole thing has left me very upset and
shaken. I’m concerned that I won’t feel safe working with Sandie
going forward and I’m certain that I don’t feel safe using the
changing room when she is there. I’m next due in to work on the
28th of December which I appreciate is not a lot of time and certainly
not enough time to fully resolve this issue. My thought is to change
elsewhere for the time being, mostly for my own safety and to
minimise my contact with her other than what is required for clinical
work. Please let me know if there’s anything else I should be doing
and what options there are for taking this further should it come to
that…..”
161. The claimant returned home after her shift ended, and went to bed. She
spoke to her family about the incident later that day, being Christmas Day,
and explained how upset she had been by the incident with the second

4104864/2024 Page 39
respondent. She explained to them that she had gone to change after
experiencing bleeding, that there had been a man in the changing room
[by which she meant the second respondent] and that she had felt
intimidated and embarrassed.
162. On 26 December 2023 Ms Davidson was on shift and read the email from
Dr Pitt of the previous day. She sent a reply shortly after having done so
stating “This is totally unacceptable” and responded regarding a meeting.
163. On the same day the second respondent sent an email to the British
Medical Association (“BMA”), the second respondent’s union, to seek
advice on what had happened. It set out a detailed explanation of the
events on 26 August 2023, 25 October 2023, 18 December 2023 and on
Christmas Eve 2023. It included comments as follows:
“[after a description of the 25 October 2023 incident] My
interactions with colleague X since these two incidents have been
minimal. She does not talk to me, frequently won’t look at me, and
often seems to ignore me if I’m present. I broadly accept this
reasoning we don’t have to be friends, just colleagues. On the one
occasion we have had to take care of a resus patient together I was
taking a history, she came in to do the observations, asked me to
take the observations, and then left. I have never had a nursing
colleague ask me to take observations on a patient anywhere in the
department, especially not an unwell patient in resus. We often
work simultaneously on such cases doing obs/getting
access/taking bloods/taking histories.
18/12/23
On a nightshift with colleague X who was as usual not
acknowledging my presence. At one point I needed to find her to
ask about a patient she had triaged. I couldn’t find her so an HCA
went to look for her. She came back with the HCA who asked her
about the patient and said that I had asked if colleague X had any
concerns about the patient at triage. In front of me she responded
only to the HCA, not acknowledging me at all. I said thanks for the
information and explained why I had asked. I got no
acknowledgment from person X for this statement and she
subsequently left the area.
I again recorded this in my phone as an instance of rudeness but
not a patient safety issue.”
164. The second respondent had an initial conversation with Mr Antoni Wilson
of the BMA after which the second respondent was sent an email asking
fo any documentation and explaining the support the BMA provided.

4104864/2024 Page 40
165. On 27 December 2023 the second respondent emailed Mr Wilson
thanking him for advice, and passing to him the email sent previously to
the BMA, the Bullying and Harassment Policy of NHS Scotland and the
first respondent’s Equality Diversity and Human Rights Policy.
166. On that day the second respondent sent a WhatsApp message to a
colleague Dr Niamh Higgins stating that “….I’ve been having trouble with
somebody at work regarding changing rooms and me being
trans…..[asking to] meet you before work tomorrow so we could get
changed at the same time to avoid me potentially being alone with this
person in the changing room.”
167. On 28 December 2023 the second respondent returned to work to
undertake the next shift after that ending at midnight of 24 December
2023. Dr Higgins’ train was delayed. The second respondent decided to
go to the changing room alone. As the second respondent did so the
second respondent noticed that the claimant was coming out of the toilet
in the changing room, and hurriedly left it. The second respondent
changed in the plaster room of the hospital. The claimant had not noticed
the second respondent.
Datix report
168. Dr Searle returned to work after being on leave on 29 December 2023,
and read the emails that had been sent to her by Dr Pitt and the second
respondent. She replied to the second respondent’s email sent on
25 December 2023 after she read it that day. Dr Searle commented that
the claimant’s actions were “completely unacceptable.”
169. Dr Searle met the second respondent at around 5pm that day. They
discussed the incident on 24/25 December 2023 (“the Christmas Eve
incident”). The second respondent said that the second respondent had
come across the claimant earlier that day. The second respondent was
shaken and distressed at doing so following the exchange during the
Christmas Eve incident. The second respondent said that there had been
two earlier incidents when the claimant had firstly left a cubicle when
carrying out observations on a patient when the second respondent
entered, and when asked about those observations said that the second
respondent could do them, and later had only spoken about a patient who
had attended the department but left before being called by the second
respondent to be attended to, speaking not directly to the second
respondent but through another member of staff. The second respondent
further referred to occasions when the claimant had left the changing room
when the second respondent was present.
170. They reviewed policies on Bullying and Harassment, the Employee Guide
on Responding to Hate Incidents, and policies on Equality, Diversity and
Human Rights. They considered that the circumstances were a hate

4104864/2024 Page 41
incident, and may be a hate crime. They decided that an appropriate first
step was by way of a Datix report, so as to record the matter. Dr Searle
also raised the possibility of the second respondent reporting the matter
to the police. The second respondent wished to consider whether to do
so. The second respondent did not report the matter to the police.
171. Datix reports are used to record issues of concern both clinical and
otherwise. A Datix report was typed by Dr Searle on the basis of the
second respondent’s comments to her and as discussed between them.
The details given as to location were “staff changing area”. It did not name
the second respondent as the complainant or the claimant as alleged
perpetrator, using Nurse A and Doctor B respectively. It had as a
description:
“Incident involving protected characteristic (Transgender identity)
Nurse A unexpectedly stopped Doctor B in staff changing area and
stated that a Doctor B should not be using that changing area on
account of Nurse A’s perception of Doctor B’s trans status. Nurse
A then proceeded to use offensive language in questioning Dr B’s
“chromosomes”, and suggested that other staff members did not
feel safe in the changing room with Doctor B present. Nurse A
alluded to Dr B’s presence in the changing room being akin to the
situation of a convicted rapist being housed in a women’s prison
after transitioning.
Doctor B repeatedly tried to stop the discussion and stated that
other mediators should be involved, and that this was not the right
place or time to have the discussion, but Nurse A repeatedly stated
her views in an aggressive and confrontational manner.
This is representative of an escalation of prior behaviours in which
Nurse A refuses to engage or acknowledge Doctor B in work
situations.”
172. In relation to action taken it stated that “Doctor B informed Consultant A
on shift, and informed clinical supervisor Consultant B. Line manager of
Nurse A informed.” On the staff listed it stated that “Nurse A - Can be given
if required, and Doctor B prefers to remain anonymous at this point – is
willing to provide if required.”
173. It was categorised as a verbal assault, and the motivating factors listed as
“gender reassignment”.
174. The Datix report was automatically sent to Dr Currer, Dr Searle, Mr William
Coyne (Violence and Aggression Adviser of the first respondent), Ms
Bumba, Mr Stuart Bennett (Physical Interventions Trainer of the first
respondent) and Dr Carew.

4104864/2024 Page 42
175. On 29 December 2023 Dr Searle wrote to the department’s consultants
by email summarising what the second respondent had told her about the
incident on 25 December 2023, which she referred to as a “hate incident”.
There were at that time nineteen consultants working within the
department, who worked different shifts and shift patterns. She referred to
the circumstances as she understood them to be from the second
respondent, and believing that she had no reason to disbelieve the second
respondent. She stated “I have had a long chat with Beth today and ensure
she knows we all support her, and that we condemn the actions of
Sandie.”
176. Consultants have both a medical education role with junior doctors and a
pastoral role. Other consultants required to be made aware of the incident
in light of the impact on the second respondent, that that may affect how
the second respondent presented when working at the department or
carrying out work there, and in the event that it led to any changes in the
working shift for the second respondent under the rota. Dr Searle intended
that the second respondent leave work after meeting her at 5pm that day,
and not continue to the end of that shift.
177. Rotas for the doctors are prepared separately to those of the nurses.
Rotas for doctors are prepared about six months in advance, from August
to February and February to August. The rota commencing in February
2024 had been concluded before Christmas 2023. The rotas are complex
in order to cover the department with a limited number of doctors. Shifts
for doctors are (i) 8am to 6pm (ii) 10am to 8pm (iii) noon to 10pm (iv) 2pm
to midnight and (v) 10pm to 8.15am.
178. On 29 December 2023 Ms Stephanie Donnachie of the BMA emailed the
second respondent to state that the query had been assigned to her whilst
her colleague Robert Ronald was on leave.
Special leave
179. On 30 December 2023 Ms Curran passed to Mr Doyle, by then promoted
to Head of Nursing, Acute Services Division, the Datix report of the
Christmas Eve incident. He replied the same day. He stated that “due to
the gravity of the allegations/complaints I would recommend that the nurse
is granted special leave and I would recommend Esther picks this up early
next week, noting the nurse is due back on duty on Tuesday 2 January
2024”. He referred to the claims being untested and that special leave
should be supportive to both members of staff. He said that “such incidents
relating to potential hate crime/bullying and harassment – as you know is
not acceptable nor should be tolerated in any circumstances.” His
message was copied to Ms Davidson, and the other charge nurse
Ms Lauren Harris.

4104864/2024 Page 43
180. On that day Ms Curran met Mr Doyle and she informed him further of the
incident on Christmas Eve, and the earlier complaint by the claimant as to
the second respondent using the changing room. He said that matters
needed to be investigated and that HR advice was required although at
that point no member of the HR staff was at work. They discussed the
policy as to equality and diversity, the policy as to bullying and
harassment, and the Code of Conduct of the NMC.
181. From their discussion Ms Curran understood that Mr Doyle had decided
that the claimant should be placed on special leave. Ms Curran then
informed the claimant by telephone from Mr Doyle’s office that she was
being placed on special leave following receipt of a serious complaint that
she had bullied another member of staff on 24 December 2023. The
claimant told Ms Curran that she had confronted the second respondent
and advised that the second respondent should not be changing in the
changing room as the second respondent was not a female. The claimant
had said that it was not acceptable and that it made the claimant feel very
uncomfortable, and that several other staff felt the same. The claimant
said that she was extremely unhappy about the situation but if the first
respondent did not want the claimant to come to work and pay her for
sitting at home that was fine with her.
182. Although the claimant did not indicate to Ms Curran that she was
distressed by the call, immediately after it she visited her family and was
distressed when explaining matters to her family.
183. Ms Curran told Ms Davidson that day that the claimant had been placed
on special leave.
184. Dr Searle sent an email to Ms Davidson, Ms Curran and Ms Harris on the
same day [30 December 2023] thanking Ms Davidson for her support and
referring to the discussion with the second respondent and “ensured that
she knows she has our support and that we will condemn Sandie’s
actions.” It referred to the second respondent writing a letter of complaint
and discussed the arrangements proposed for managing matters, and
noted that rosters had been arranged to avoid contact between the
claimant and second respondent until the end of January 2024.
185. Dr Searle also emailed the second respondent that day to state that
Ms Curran was sad not to be able to speak to the second respondent and
that she also condemned the claimant’s actions, and fully supported the
second respondent. It added that Ms Curran, Ms Harris and Ms Davidson
would be meeting the claimant “to inform her that her actions were
unacceptable and to make a plan for going forward.”
186. Dr Searle emailed Dr Currer that day asking to whom a complaint should
be sent. Dr Currer replied with advice and comments. Dr Searle had also

4104864/2024 Page 44
earlier that day emailed Ms Bumba although Ms Bumba had received the
Datix.
187. The claimant exchanged messages that day with a colleague, Sharlene,
who she had told about the special leave. The claimant stated “I’ll lose the
argument though. Everyone sticks up for the minority. Wouldn’t be so bad
but I’ve been feckin pleasant with her and didn’t even bully. I was shaking
like a leaf. I’m mad now though. My mum said she would make her into a
woman!!!”
188. On 31 December 2023 Ms Davidson returned to work. She had been in
the role of Clinical Nurse Manager on an interim basis for about three
weeks. She did not have experience of or training in investigations.
Dr Searle informed Ms Davidson of the Christmas incident involving the
claimant and second respondent, that the claimant had walked out of the
resus room, and had not done observations on a patient when the second
respondent had walked in. Ms Davidson was informed that the claimant
had been placed on special leave. As there were still no HR staff available
for advice Ms Davidson decided that the special leave should continue
until that could be obtained on 3 January 2024, after the new year holiday.
189. The second respondent drafted a document as a formal complaint on
31 December 2023, but did not send it at that stage.
190. Also on that day Mr Doyle emailed Dr Searle, Ms Davidson, Ms Curran,
Ms Shepherd and Ms Malone with the said document on Responding to
Hate Incidents.
January 2024
191. On or around 1 January 2024 Ms Davidson called the claimant and
advised her that the special leave would continue to 3 January 2024 that
being when HR staff returned to work after being on holiday.
192. On 2 January 2024 Ms Malone returned to work after being on holiday.
She emailed and sent by internal message an extract of the Datix report
to colleagues Ms Belinda Morgan, Ms Angie Shepherd, Ms Bumba, Ms
Davidson, HR officers and others that day and sought an urgent call the
following day for HR advice on next steps.
193. On 3 January 2024 Ms Davidson decided to place the claimant on
suspension. She took that decision after having had advice from Ms Jackie
Herkes of HR of the first respondent [as referred to below], after discussion
with Dr Searle who told Ms Davidson about alleged incidents when the
claimant had not communicated with the second respondent with regard
to a patient on two occasions, and separately from Ms Gillian Malone, the
first respondent’s Head of Nursing. In her call with Ms Malone they
discussed the risk assessment that Ms Davidson had undertaken (which
was not before the Tribunal) and any mitigations that could be put in place,

4104864/2024 Page 45
and the option of alternative work in another department was considered.
Ms Davidson explained that she had a patient safety concern as it was
suggested that on two occasions the claimant had left a cubicle as she did
not want to work with the second respondent.
194. Ms Malone’s advice was that the claimant should be suspended, that there
would need to be an investigation and that Ms Davidson would be the lead
investigator given her role as Clinical Nurse Manager. Ms Davidson
decided to act on that advice, and to suspend the claimant.
195. Ms Herkes wrote to HR colleagues, copied to Ms Davidson, on 3 January
2024 setting out the advice she had given. It stated that suspension was
a last resort, not to be used if there were other options, commenting that
Ms Davidson felt that it was almost impossible to keep the claimant and
second respondent apart in the department, and that she had spoken to
Ms Malone. It included that Ms Davidson “believes that there is a patient
safety issue due to the seriousness of the allegation and therefore wishes
to suspend”.
196. Ms Malone also emailed her manager Ms Norma Beveridge, Director of
Nursing, and Mr Iain MacLeod, the Deputy Medical Director (Acute) of the
first respondent, with the Datix report that day. Ms Beveridge responded
on the same day that “This is a very serious allegation and the potential
for significant reputational damage. Urgent HR advice is required. Please
let me know what the HR response is and if necessary I will escalate to
Sandra Raynor.” Ms Raynor is Head of Workforce Planning and
Resourcing at the first respondent. Ms Malone sent the Datix to
Mr MacLeod as the incident involved the second respondent as a junior
doctor. He replied that he would update the Director of Medical Education
and the Medical Director for their information.
Suspension
197. Ms Davidson decided to suspend the claimant after discussion with
Ms Malone on 3 January 2024, who had advised that course of action.
Ms Davidson did so to allow investigation of the allegations made, and in
order she thought to protect both the second respondent and the claimant.
She had regard to concerns she had over whether patient safety had been
affected by how the claimant had, as she understood it, interacted with the
second respondent, and a concern that the claimant had breached the
NMC Code of Conduct. She wished to avoid any further incidents between
the claimant and second respondent which if they occurred could impact
on the claimant’s regulatory position, and thought that it would take time
to arrange rosters to allow the investigation.
198. Ms Davidson completed a suspension record document. Under the reason
for suspension she wrote “In accordance with the workforce conduct policy
and the serious allegation of bullying and harassment it was deemed

4104864/2024 Page 46
necessary to suspend Sandie with immediate effect until the matter is able
to be investigated, HR guidance sought.” No written risk assessment
document was prepared by Ms Davidson. She completed a checklist
document for the suspension.
199. Ms Davidson telephoned the claimant that day [3 January 2024] and made
reference to having a meeting to discuss the incident. The claimant said
that she was near the hospital and would come in. She came to the office
Ms Davidson used. The claimant attended the meeting without being
aware of the possibility of suspension, and was not informed in advance
of the possibility of having representation from her union at it. It was with
Ms Davidson and with Ms Angie Shepherd, Ms Davidson’s Manager, at
which Ms Shepherd advised the claimant of her immediate suspension.
200. Dr Searle emailed the second respondent on 3 January 2024 stating that
Mr Doyle was now involved in investigating the incident and wanted to
pass on his support to the second respondent. She said that he and the
senior nursing team were taking the incident very seriously, and wanted
to reassure the second respondent that the second respondent would not
have to work with the claimant again.
201. Also on 3 January 2024 the second respondent emailed Ms Donnachie of
the BMA attaching a draft of a formal complaint. She responded on 8
January 2024 to state that Mr Ronald was back from leave and would be
in contact with the second respondent.
202. The claimant sent a message to a group of colleagues with whom she had
been on holiday to inform them of her suspension. One replied on
3 January 2024 to the effect that it was ridiculous, and another that it was
“horrendous. Where are your rights, the world’s gone mad. Should have a
separate changing room for non male/female…..”
203. The suspension was confirmed by letter to the claimant from Ms Davidson
of 4 January 2024, which said that the meeting had proceeded because
of a delay in representation becoming available. It also advised her that
Ms Davidson would be arranging an investigation under the NHS Scotland
Workforce Policies Investigation Process. It informed her that there were
concerns in relation to "alleged unwanted behaviours towards another
member of NHS Fife staff”. The letter informed her that Ms Michelle
Gilmour, Service Manager, was her Designated Contact Person, and
noted that the role of that person was outlined in a guide to suspension
which was enclosed. It stated that during suspension she should not
access her work email or visit her office base, but did not instruct her
specifically to maintain confidentiality.
204. On 4 January 2025 the second respondent met Dr Currer and
Ms Davidson. The second respondent was informed that there was to be
an investigation, that the claimant had been suspended pending that

4104864/2024 Page 47
investigation. The purpose of the meeting Dr Currer considered was to
reassure the second respondent that the second respondent would not be
working on shift with the claimant.
205. In the period 3 – 5 January 2024 Ms Davidson spoke to Ms Bumba, who
had been on holiday until 3 January 2024 and seen the Datix report on her
return. Ms Bumba advised that from the terms of that Datix report it
appeared that the incident had been unpleasant, that it could be
discriminatory and advised that she contact Human Resources.
206. In that same period Ms Herkes, Ms Sinclair-Forrow and Ms Jorgensen all
of HR at the first respondent exchanged emails with regard to the matter.
Ms Jorgensen asked on 4 January 2024 “I am assuming the patient safety
concern relates to the potential for patients undergoing a similar process
being treated in a similar manner but do we have any evidence to support
this concern, as it’s possible that this nurse’s issue relates only to this
doctor? Let’s see what is documented in the risk assessment.” Ms Herkes
replied that “we have no evidence….I heard loud and clear that the issue
was sharing the changing room.”
207. Their opinions as expressed in the emails were to the effect that the risk
could be managed. The HR advice to Ms Davidson had not been to
suspend the claimant. An email from Ms Herkes summarising comments
in a discussion with Ms Davidson included that there was a belief of “a
patient safety issue due to the seriousness of the allegation and therefore
wishes to suspend.” A later email noted that advice had been taken from
the Head of Nursing, Ms Malone, which was to suspend. Reference was
made to a staffing crisis and “how it was ludicrous to have a nurse at home,
2 nightshifts a week, but the response was what if there is a similar
situation in another area.”
208. The claimant and second respondent were not rostered to be on the same
shift in January 2024.
Investigation planning
209. On 5 January 2024 Mr Doyle emailed Ms Davidson with links and
attachments "to help start planning investigation.” He referred to having a
meeting with her later that morning. The attachments included a partly
completed planning document much of which he had populated. It did not
have a completed start or end date, but stated in relation to when/where
notes to be taken by: “As soon as possible for both parties would be
supportive.” Ms Davidson prepared an Investigation planning document,
consisting of one page with the "issues that need to be explored/clarified”
stated to be “incident in Changing Room. Alleged exclusion from
interacting with person.” It stated that the investigation meetings were to
be completed by Ms Davidson and Ms Mechelle Sinclair-Forrow [the date
on which that form was completed was not given in evidence].

4104864/2024 Page 48
210. Also on that date Dr Currer emailed Dr Melvin Carew the consultant who
was the clinical lead for the department, Dr Searle, Ms Davidson,
Ms Curran and Ms Harris. It had the subject line “Protected characteristic
incident”. It referred to a discussion and a “need to know” group, with
commentary that included the following:
“…..The lead for the investigation has yet to be determined but will
likely be Jamie Doyle or Angie Shepherd. Esther cannot do it as
she has been involved in the discussions with Sandie previously.
Sandie has also been referred to the NMC. This information must
not be shared with anyone outside this group…………Esther and I
updated Beth yesterday and reiterated that the behaviour was
unacceptable…..Please let the group here know of any
updates/further conversations to avoid the risk of foot-in-mouth
syndrome!”
211. The claimant had not been referred to the NMC. None of the recipients
replied to that email.
212. On 7 January 2024 Dr Carew emailed Dr Searle, and all the department’s
consultants, in response to her message of 29 December 2024 adding “I
just wanted to say that the incident is being investigated and Beth is being
supported.”
213. On 9 January 2024 Ms Davidson made a referral to the first respondent’s
occupational health team to address whether the claimant was fit to attend
an investigation meeting.
214. On 10 January 2024 the claimant posted a message to a group of friends
responding to a message from one of the group referring to the second
respondent: “that sounds like it. You forgot the shadow and pathetic voice.
The trans have all the rights even when it comes to not telling the other
staff. Only way I can get around this is by saying we weren’t made aware
of those protocols prior to it starting (I think).”
215. Another member of the group replied “Yes they should have a protocol for
this as this not only affects both you and them, and obviously society has
changed. I feel if they have full gender change then this would be
appropriate, however if the [sic] still got their “bits” I feel they should use a
disabled toilet as its unisex, especially a man.”.
216. The second respondent was scheduled to go on secondment to
ICU/Anaesthetics from the second week in January 2024 for a period of
four weeks, such that the second respondent was not to be in the
department during that period.
217. On 12 January 2024 Dr Searle emailed the second respondent and
Ms Davidson with a copy to Dr Currer, Dr Carew, Ms Curran and

4104864/2024 Page 49
Ms Harris. It had as its heading “Re: protected characteristic incident.”
Normally “Re” is added automatically when an email replies to an earlier
email. It can be removed or altered by the sender, as can the content of
the message including by deleting all or part of the original message. If a
message is replied to by using “reply to all” the message automatically
populates the individuals to whom it is sent in the same way as in the
original message.
218. The message from Dr Searle stated that “Esther [Davidson] has taken the
lead on investigating the incident….” and made reference to a summary
of the details of the incident.
219. The second respondent responded on 14 January 2024 asking if it was
“just the details of the incident at Christmas that Esther would like a
summary of? I had planned to include some of the background in my
formal statement as well. …” Ms Davidson replied the following day to
state that “to commence the investigation it would be good to have the
initial incident at Christmas” and that the background could be addressed
at interview “which would enable me to investigate fully.”
220. On 15 January 2024 Mr Robert Ronald of the BMA who had been advising
the second respondent sent the second respondent a draft statement
prepared by the second respondent with his own comments, and asked
for emails and attachments submitted or received in relation to the matter,
a copy of any relevant policy/process if provided and anything else
considered relevant.
221. On 16 January 2024 the second respondent replied to Ms Davidson to
state that the second respondent was waiting on advice from the BMA. On
18 January 2024 Ms Davidson emailed the second respondent to seek the
statement by 24 January 2024. The second respondent replied to the
effect that that would be done.
222. Ms Davidson and Ms Sinclair-Forrow arranged an investigation planning
meeting on 18 January 2024.
Second respondent’s further written report of incident
223. On 23 January 2024 the second respondent sent by email to Ms Davidson
a document headed “Hate Incident 24 December 2023”. The document
was copied principally from the draft of a formal complaint document that
had been prepared and amended to include only the reference to the
incident on 24/25 December 2023. The second respondent did so as that
is what the second respondent understood was being requested at that
stage from Ms Davidson’s email of 15 January 2024. The second
respondent understood that background or earlier issues would be
addressed at an investigation meeting from what Ms Davidson had stated
in that email.

4104864/2024 Page 50
224. On 25 January 2024 Ms Davidson wrote to the second respondent to
acknowledge that and stated “As a department this is not the behaviour
we would expect or tolerate. There will be a full investigation carried
out….”
February 2024
225. On 2 February 2024, Ms Angie Shepherd, Service Manager and
Ms Davidson’s line manager, reviewed and decided to continue the
claimant’s suspension. A letter was sent to the claimant that day by her to
confirm that, which referred to “the investigation is still ongoing”. It was
continued to 1 March 2024.
226. By that date the claimant had not been assessed by occupational health
(OH) as being fit to attend the interview, and on 4 February 2024
Ms Davison emailed Ms Malone that delay had been caused by the
claimant not having had the OH assessment and said that she felt that
without HR support she would be unable to progress the investigation.
Ms Malone replied on 5 February 2024 with advice including the need for
a suspension review within four weeks. She separately sought to expedite
the OH assessment. She was aware that there had been delays at OH
due to pressure of work.
227. An appointment was sent to the claimant for an interview on 9 February
2024 but she did not attend. A later date was arranged.
228. On 13 February 2024 Ms Anne Hamilton, HR Adviser, emailed
Ms Davidson asking about whether she had obtained statements from the
second respondent and Senior Charge Nurse, by which she meant
Ms Curran, and whether she had heard from OH about the claimant’s
fitness to participate in the investigation. Ms Davidson replied and after a
further exchange on 14 February 2024 sent an email attaching statements
from the second respondent and Ms Curran, and seeking support for the
investigation. Ms Hamilton replied on the same day to advise that
Ms Davidson arrange meetings with the second respondent and
Ms Curran, referring her to a meeting template, and noting that this was
Ms Davidson’s first investigation.
229. Ms Curran sent Ms Davidson her statement that day.
230. On 15 February 2024 the claimant’s solicitor wrote to the first respondent
stating that they had been instructed to raise proceedings against the first
respondent alleging direct discrimination, harassment on the grounds of
sex and gender critical belief and victimisation under the Equality Act
2010, and whistleblowing detriment under section 47B of the Employment
Rights Act 1996. It included the following narrative:
“It is understood that from on or about late 2023, management at
the Victoria Hospital has allowed a trans identifying male junior

4104864/2024 Page 51
doctor (who uses the name “Beth Upton” and who hereinafter is
referred to as “B”) unfettered access to the A & E female changing
room. It is alleged that the decision to permit male people access
to a workplace “female only” changing room contravenes
Regulation 24 of the Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare)
Regulations 1992 and amounts to sex discrimination for failing to
provide suitable female only changing facilities (i.e. where women
are not forced to share with members of the opposite sex). Further,
this policy was not properly communicated to staff in advance and
was implemented without any type of risk assessment, equality
impact assessment or consultation with unions or female staff.
On or about mid November 2023 B entered the female changing
room when our client was in a state of undress (she was wearing
only her trousers and bra) (“the first incident”). Our client’s dignity
was violated, and she was extremely uncomfortable and
intimidated by the presence of a man and so left the changing room
and waited outside in the corridor re-entering only once B had left.
Shortly after the first incident, our client raised concerns with her
Line Manager, Esther Davidson (Acting Clinical Nurse Manager)
(“ED”) stating that she found it upsetting and uncomfortable that a
man was being allowed access to the female changing room. ED
appeared sympathetic and told our client that she would get the
matter sorted.
On or about early December 2023, there was an almost identical
repeat of the first incident (“the second incident”). A week or so after
the second incident our client again raised her concerns with ED
who told her that she had raised the matter with HR but “never got
anywhere”. Our client once again told ED how she was being
negatively impacted by having to share changing room facilities
with a man.
Our client was on shift on Christmas Eve 2023 when at around
midnight she found herself alone in the female changing room with
B. Our client is going through the menopause and had an
unexpected heavy period. She entered the changing room in order
to fetch a clean pair of pants from her locker to change into. Our
client did not want to start changing in the presence of a man. B
then started to undress in front of our client; specifically, B started
to remove his trousers. Our client immediately turned her face away
from B so as to avoid having to witness him undress in front of her.
Our client then told B that she found him undressing in front of her
unacceptable and was embarrassed and intimidated by his
presence in the female changing room. She told B that she had no
issue with how he identified but asked if he could try to understand

4104864/2024 Page 52
that his presence in a female changing room distressed and
frightened some women. It is alleged that B was indifferent to our
client’s upset telling her that he had as much right to be in the
female changing room as she did (which our client denied). B then
informed our client that there were protocols she could follow if she
were unhappy. Our client contends that she felt forced to raise her
concerns directly with B because of management’s failures to act
on her two complaints made to ED and referred to above.”
231. The email addressed matters on 30 December 2023 and a meeting she
said was on 4 January 2024 when she was suspended, and also protested
the claimant’s suspension, argued that it was unlawful. It referred to the
impact on the claimant’s health, and stated that the claimant contended
that other female colleagues are upset by the second respondent’s
presence in the female changing room but the workplace culture actively
discourages the raising of concerns. It sought confirmation that the
suspension be lifted immediately and that the female only changing room
will be returned to female only. It suggested the provision of a separate
space for staff who do not wish to use either male or female changing
room facilities be provided.
232. Ms Malone acknowledged receipt of that message on 19 February 2024
and confirmed that it had been passed to NHS solicitors.
233. On 21 February 2024 Ms Michelle Gilmour, the first respondent’s Service
Manager who had been appointed as the claimant’s designated contact
person as a result of the suspension, to provide support to her, emailed
the claimant a copy of the Datix report that had been made by the second
respondent.
234. On 23 February 2024 the claimant sent a message to her friend Sandra
asking if she had any more details about the second respondent and
added “it would help to know if he’s a serial complainer.”
Early Conciliation
235. The claimant commenced Early Conciliation in relation to both
respondents on 26 February 2024.
Review of suspension
236. On 26 February 2024 Ms Malone emailed Ms Jorgensen about appointing
a manager to review the suspension. She did so in response to Ms
Jorgensen who had asked “anything further on the suspension being
lifted?” Ms Shepherd who had been involved was by then absent through
illness.
237. Ms Charlotte (Lottie) Myles was appointed by Ms Malone to review the
suspension. Ms Malone and Ms Myles had a brief discussion about the

4104864/2024 Page 53
position on 27 February 2024. Ms Malone emailed Ms Jorgensen and
others with an update and referred to the claimant wishing to be
accompanied by an MSP. Ms Jorgensen replied by referring to the Once
for Scotland policy approach to representation which was by trade union
representative or colleague.
238. Ms Myles was provided with little documentation in relation to the decision
to suspend, but had an outline summary of the position left on her desk
[which was not before the Tribunal]. She did not have sight of any written
risk assessment carried out when the decision to suspend was first made.
239. On 27 February 2024 Ms Myles called the claimant to inform her of her
role in reviewing the suspension. The claimant said that she wished to be
represented by her MSP (as recorded in documents although it may have
been her MP) at any meeting. Ms Myles sought HR advice on that issue.
Ms Jorgensen replied that day recommending that the claimant be
informed of the policy of representation by a trade union representative or
work colleague.
240. Ms Malone met Ms Myles that day, after which she emailed colleagues
about the issue of representation. Also on that date Ms Malone had a
discussion with Ms Anne Hamilton of HR. They discussed that the
claimant had raised a concern over the second respondent using the
female changing room with Ms Davidson prior to the incident on Christmas
Eve, and concluded that Ms Davidson should not be the investigator as
she was a potential witness.
241. Also on that date Ms Jorgensen emailed Ms Raynor with a copy to Ms
Hamilton and referred to the claimant’s wish to be accompanied by her
MSP, referred to the policy about being accompanied, and raised whether
Ms Davidson was the right person to investigate the incident as the
claimant stated that she had raised her concerns with her manager, which
Ms Jorgensen assumed was Ms Davidson.
242. On 28 February 2024 Ms Hamilton emailed Ms Raynor and stated that
she would ask Ms Malone to suggest an alternative investigating officer.
She also emailed Ms Raynor and Ms Jorgensen in reply to the latter’s
email, and stated that Ms Malone would give consideration to changing
the investigating officer. It also noted that an OH report on the claimant
was awaited.
243. On the same day OH issued a report to the first respondent which had
followed a telephone discussion with the claimant that day. The claimant
had agreed to participate during the call. The report confirmed that the
claimant was passed fit to undertake an investigation meeting. It referred
to the adverse impact of matters on the claimant, treatment given by her
GP and that to delay the investigation meeting would impact negatively on
her mental health.

4104864/2024 Page 54
244. On 29 February 2024 Ms Malone had a discussion with Ms Angela
Glancey, Clinical Service Manager, and another Service Manager, and
asked if one of them had capacity to undertake the investigation. Ms
Glancey said that she did, and Ms Malone confirmed that she would be
the investigator accordingly.
Investigation
245. On 29 February 2024 Ms Glancey commenced a disciplinary investigation
in relation to the complaint by the second respondent. It was carried out
under the NHS Scotland Workforce Policies Investigation Process (“the
Investigation Process”). She went on holiday immediately after that date.
March 2024
246. On 7 March 2024 the claimant and her trade union representative Mr
Stuart Fraser attended a suspension review meeting with Ms Myles and
Ms Davidson. The claimant gave her account of the occasions when she
had left the changing room when the second respondent was present, and
the incident on Christmas Eve. The claimant stated that she would return
to work under protest. Ms Myles asked the claimant about her position in
relation to dealing with a trans patient, and was assured that she would
treat a trans patient the same as any patient. Ms Myles accepted that
assurance.
247. During the meeting, Ms Davidson and Ms Myles asked the claimant if she
would be receptive to a return to work at a different workplace temporarily
whilst the investigation was ongoing. That possibility is a part of the
Conduct Policy and Investigation Policy. The claimant did not wish to do
so. Ms Myles did not consider that there was a risk to patient safety from
alleged prior acts of the claimant in leaving a work position when the
second respondent was there, in light of the absence of any written record
of such an issue being raised at the time in accordance with procedure to
do so. There was no written record of any complaint against the claimant
by a patient or member of staff. Ms Myles considered that there was no
sufficient reason for the claimant to remain on suspension.
248. Ms Myles told the claimant that she would return to work and
arrangements for that were discussed. Ms Davidson and Ms Myles told
the claimant that they would try to ensure that she and the second
respondent were not rostered for the same shifts and suggested that the
claimant return on day shifts initially. The claimant requested that the first
respondent not permit those she regarded as men to use the female
changing room. Ms Myles stated that this would be difficult given the
advice from Equality and Diversity, by which she meant the advice from
Ms Bumba.

4104864/2024 Page 55
249. Ms Myles reported to Ms Malone and Ms Davidson by email after the
meeting. Her report indicated that the claimant deliberately misgendered
the second respondent during it by calling the second respondent “he”
during it. There was also reference to a possible return to work on 18
March 2024 on different shifts to the second respondent.
250. A risk assessment form was completed in relation to the review of the
suspension. In it Ms Myles did not consider that there was a risk to patient
safety in the claimant returning, having been assured on that by the
claimant. She was also informed by Ms Davidson that the claimant had
not had any complaints against her from patients in her 30 years of
service. The form recorded the terms of the conversation with the claimant
which included exploring the possibility of the claimant working in another
department which the claimant did not wish to do, or working on alternative
shifts to the second respondent which the claimant was content with to
limit exposure to the second respondent, which Ms Myles and Ms
Davidson considered “possibly a good idea.”
251. The claimant’s solicitor and the first respondent’s solicitor exchanged
emails that day [7 March 2024]. At that time the first respondent’s solicitor
had not been instructed by the second respondent.
252. On 8 March 2024 Ms Malone reported the position to Ms Jorgensen
copied to others by email, stating that a further risk assessment was
supportive of returning the claimant to work on a different shift pattern to
that of the second respondent, and that the claimant would return to day
shift work so as to be supported by a manager at band 6 or 7 level. Such
manager support could not be provided on night shift. The return to work
was anticipated to be on 27 March 2024.
253. Ms Myles spoke after making her decision to Dr Searle and Dr Currer
separately, both of whom did not agree with that decision. They raised the
issue of patient safety. Ms Myles asked if there had been any
documentation of any concern at the time of any incident as required by
procedure, and it was confirmed that there had not been. She stated that
that lack of documentation had been part of the reason for her decision.
Ms Myles also spoke after the meeting to Ms Davidson and Ms Curran,
both of whom did not agree with the decision. Ms Malone appeared to Ms
Myles to be surprised by the decision and asked her for her reasons for it.
When Ms Myles explained those reasons Ms Malone agreed with them.
254. On 12 March 2024 Ms Myles emailed the claimant to tell her that she was
still trying to catch up with Ms Davidson to work out a suitable shift pattern,
but proposed potential days for returning to work initially on 27 and 28
March 2024. On 13 March 2024 Ms Hamilton forwarded an email from Ms
Davidson dated 14 February 2024 to her and attached statements from
the second respondent and Ms Curran. Those were the only statements
obtained by Ms Davidson from her investigation.

4104864/2024 Page 56
255. At around the same time Ms Davidson provided a folder of documents for
the investigation which contained the statements from the second
respondent and Ms Curran, the checklist she had completed in relation to
the claimant’s suspension, the Bullying and Harassment Policy and the
Workforce Investigation Policy. Ms Glancey met Ms Hamilton at about that
time to discuss how the investigation would be undertaken. The names
identified at that stage for interview were the second respondent and
claimant, Ms Davidson, Ms Curran and Dr Searle.
256. On 15 March 2024 Dr Searle emailed the second respondent to state that
an independent investigating officer had been appointed, not from the
department, and that Ms Hamilton wanted to reassure the second
respondent that the investigation is definitely progressing.
257. On 23 March 2024, the claimant called Ms Harris about her returning to
work, who told her that she would be working two half day shifts on a
graduated return to work. On 24 March 2024 she called again and spoke
to Ms Davidson, who explained that she had been advised to return the
claimant to work on short day shifts to enable her to have support from
senior staff. The claimant explained that she was unable to work day shifts
and agreed to take that week and the following as annual leave.
258. On 24 March 2024 Ms Davidson emailed Ms Myles stating that the
claimant had contacted Ms Curran the day before stating that she “was
not willing to work on days” [as opposed to the night shift]. She stated that
she had received advice from HR of the first respondent that it was
reasonable for the claimant to return on days when senior staff would be
available. She said that that was the view of senior charge nurses and was
her own view.
259. On 25 March 2024 the claimant’s solicitor wrote to the first respondent’s
solicitor to ask the latter to remind the first respondent that the claimant’s
continuing absence from the workplace was an ongoing detriment and
evidence of on-going discrimination. The first respondent’s solicitor replied
confirming that the message had been shared with the first respondent,
and that he was now instructed to act for the second respondent.
260. On 28 March 2024 Ms Myles spoke to the claimant who was adamant that
she did not wish to return to work on day shift. Ms Myles emailed Ms
Davidson and Ms Curran to ask for details of the claimant’s shifts. Ms
Curran replied that day with those details.
261. That day Ms Myles emailed the claimant about her suspension, the
possibility of a short term return to work on days which she [Ms Myles] and
the claimant’s RCN representative felt supportive, with a different shift
pattern to the second respondent. It referred to the claimant not agreeing
to do so and the reinstatement of suspension on 1 April 2024, and

4104864/2024 Page 57
proposed a meeting to discuss it while they sought “to resolve and further
explore matters.”
262. Ms Myles gave reasons for the return to day shift, being firstly to support
her return for about a month before resuming night shift, secondly she
referred to a need for proper oversight of the claimant’s return to work,
including oversight of her interactions with staff and patients, and said that
“part of the allegations/concerns to be investigated relate to the care of
patients”, and thirdly to ensure that there was no possible interference with
the investigation. That letter was the first occasion on which the claimant
had been informed by the first respondent of any issue over her care of
patients being investigated. Ms Myles considered that having a senior
member of staff present when the claimant returned would assist the
claimant should any issue arise when she was at work partly in an effort
to assist the claimant.
263. That day Ms Curran sent Ms Myles details of allocated shifts for the
claimant on a graduated return to work.
April 2024
264. On 1 April 2024 the claimant emailed Ms Myles with a letter setting out
why for her working on day shift was a difficulty, related to the care of her
dog. She said that her family was able to care for the dog at weekends
and that she could return to work for a four week period working on
Saturday or Sundays from 1.30pm for a six or twelve hour shift.
265. Ms Myles replied to the claimant by email that day stating that she believed
that that could be accommodated for a 4 week trial period and that she
would have the shifts allocated as soon as possible. Ms Myles emailed Ms
Davidson about that, and arrangements for managerial support were
made. Ms Myles received from Dr Searle also that day details of the
second respondent’s shifts and replied to state that the claimant’s return
to work could be accommodated so that there would be no opportunity for
the claimant to have contact with the second respondent.
266. On 2 April 2024 the claimant told Ms Myles that she would return to work,
under protest, on weekend day shifts for an initial four week period. On
the following day the claimant’s solicitor wrote to the first respondent’s
solicitor to state that she wished to place on record that she only agreed
to the conditions for return to work “under duress” as the first respondent
had made it clear that had she not agreed to return under those conditions
her suspension would have remained in place.
267. Also that day Dr Searle sent Ms Myles details of the second respondent’s
shifts by a spreadsheet.
268. On 3 April 2024 the claimant’s solicitor wrote to the respondents’ solicitor
that the claimant was returning to work under protest. The letter set out a

4104864/2024 Page 58
request for information and documents. That included the risk assessment
referred to in the letter to the claimant of 28 March 2024 and full details of
the patient care allegations including a) the date made b) the identity of
the person making them c) to whom made d) in what form made and e)
the nature of the allegations(s). The letter alleged that the allegation as to
patient care was false.
269. Also that day Ms Malone emailed Ms Davidson about the level of seniority
of the manager required for the claimant’s return to work suggesting that
it could be at band 6 or above. Ms Davidson replied that “it was just to
maintain safety as this has not been discussed with any of the band 6
nurses.”
270. On 4 April 2024 the claimant and Ms Myles exchanged messages about
the shifts to return to work.
271. On 6 April 2024 after the second respondent learned of the claim being
pursued against the second respondent as an individual, and after the
second respondent was told at a meeting with Ms Myles that the claimant
would be returning to work on a phased basis on different shifts to those
of the second respondent, the second respondent commenced a period
of eight weeks of sick leave, followed by a period on a phased return to
work.
272. An Early Conciliation Certificate was issued to the claimant on 8 April
2024.
273. On 9 April 2024 Ms Myles started the completion of a risk assessment
form in relation to the review of suspension of the claimant, the template
for which had been sent to her that day by Mr Doyle.
274. On 10 April 2024 Ms Glancey sent background papers to Ms Myles, after
which Ms Myles completed the form. On the same day Ms Myles emailed
Ms Glancey asking for the notes she had, and whether dates had been
scheduled for the investigatory meetings. Ms Glancey replied that day
sending what she described as the “paperwork” she had, and stating that
letters for meetings had not been sent and she would speak to Ms
Hamilton to have that done.
Investigation allegations
275. Ms Glancey returned from a period of annual leave of about two weeks on
or around 12 April 2024. She spoke to Ms Mechelle Sinclair-Forrow who
was the HR member of staff allocated to assist her in the investigation. Ms
Glancey was informed that Dr Pitt was a person who should be
interviewed. Ms Glancey made arrangements to send formal letters of
invitation to witnesses, which had not been done during her leave. By then
Ms Glancey had had sight of the Datix report and the Guidance in relation

4104864/2024 Page 59
to Hate Incident and the written complaint by the second respondent dated
23 January 2024.
276. On 12 April 2024 the claimant was invited by letter from Ms Glancey to an
initial meeting under the Investigation process. It gave the following by
way of explanation for the delay in matters to that point:
“I appreciate the time that has passed since [the complaint] was
first submitted and would like to take this opportunity to apologise
on behalf of NHS Fife for the delay in taking this forward. I have
been advised that several factors have impacted on this being
progressed, some of which relate to unplanned staff absences,
other leave, requests for statements and identifying a suitable
manager to investigate the complaint.”
277. It provided the clamant with details in relation to the allegation as follows:
“Incident – End of shift midnight 24/12/23 into 25/12/23
Whilst Dr Beth Upton, who is a transgender woman, was in the
changing room, you came in. She went to the bathroom, and on
leaving the cubicle noted you were still in the changing room. You
stated to BU that you don’t think it’s appropriate that she use the
changing room. You advised that you felt intimidated by her and
stated it’s the women’s changing room, you can’t be in there, its
wrong and that lots of others feel this way.
BU explained that she was very sorry that you feel intimidated, but
she has been told she can change there. You kept telling her you
find her intimidating. You stated you has [sic] no problem with her
and understands you’re going through ‘some process’ but she is
not a woman and can’t be in here. You asked her ‘What are your
chromosomes?’. BU explained she was sorry you are intimidated
but BU is a woman and is allowed to use the space. BU advised
that if you have concerns could you please raise them formally as
she did not think this was the most appropriate time, place or
process for this conversation.
You continued to tell BU you are intimidated by her, and you told
her she is not a woman. You told her you wouldn’t change in front
of men because you have had a bad history with men. BU advised
that she understood and sympathised. You stated that she doen’t
understand and doesn’t sympathise enough, or she wouldn’t be
changing in that changing room.
BU again advised she was sorry you were intimidated but re-
iterated she did not want to have this conversation there, she didn’t
think it was appropriate, BU said she was not sure what she could
do to resolve this, you responded to say you could not change there

4104864/2024 Page 60
and that would help. You stated that women have a right to feel
safe, you said ‘’it’s just like that person in the prisons’.
BU advised that she re-iterated on more than one occasion that she
felt it was an inappropriate time, however, you would not let it go
and continued to repeat what had already been said.”
278. It referred to maintaining the confidentiality of the investigation process,
and attached the NHSScotland Workforce Policies Investigation Process,
Flowchart and Guide for Employees. It was copied to the claimant’s union
representative Mr Stuart Fraser, and to Ms Sinclair-Forrow.
Return to work
279. The claimant returned to work on 14 April 2024, working from 1.30pm to
8pm, and did so on again 20, 27 and 28 April and 4 and 11 May 2024.
280. On 15 April 2024 the respondents’ solicitor wrote to the claimant’s solicitor
with commentary on matters, and stated in relation to the investigation “I
do hope that matters can now progress speedily as I acknowledge there
has been a significant delay.” The claimant’s solicitor replied the following
day asking that instructions be taken on the patient care allegations
seeking fair notice of them.
281. On 16 April 2024 Ms Sinclair-Forrow emailed the administration team, Ms
Glancey and others with the subject line of “Meetings SP” being a
reference to the claimant, stating that the “CLO are chasing for this to
progress as a matter of urgency”.
282. On the same date Ms Sinclair-Forrow emailed Ms Glancey about asking
Ms Davidson for a statement.
283. On 17 April 2024 Ms Glancey emailed the second respondent stating that
she had “the statement provided at the time but if you would like to add
any further statements please can you send them to me beforehand.” The
second respondent emailed Ms Glancey in reply about the investigation
and gave Dr Searle as the person to be the work colleague at it. The
second respondent asked if Ms Glancey had the statement just detailing
the incident or the summary including the incidents leading up to it.
284. Ms Glancey emailed the second respondent on 18 April 2024 and stated
that Dr Searle was to be spoken to as a witness and it would be preferrable
if someone else could be asked to support the second respondent but “that
if the second respondent would prefer to retain Dr Searle in that role that’s
OK.” It suggested a meeting on 8 May 2024.
285. On 18 April 2024 Ms Sinclair-Forrow emailed Ms Glancey stating that Ms
Davidson had advised that there were issues around the claimant leaving
cubicles and work areas where the second respondent was in attendance.

4104864/2024 Page 61
That was the first time that allegation had been brought to Ms Glancey’s
attention.
286. Also on 18 April 2024 Ms Glancey wrote to each of Ms Davidson, Ms
Curran, Dr Searle and Dr Pitt inviting them to an investigation meeting.
The letter included a standard provision as follows:
“If you have not already done so, it would be helpful if you are able
to provide me with a statement outlining your awareness of these
issues before we meet. Alternatively, we can explore this with you
further at the meeting.
In the meantime, you should avoid discussing the case with anyone
other than your representative to ensure your confidentiality and
that of the other parties involved.”
287. The policy provided that the person could be accompanied by a trade
union representative or work colleague.
288. Further on 18 April 2024 the respondents’ solicitor emailed the claimant’s
solicitor regarding the patient care allegations and said that he didn’t have
anything to add. He agreed that if there are specific allegations the
claimant will need clarity on them and a chance to respond.
289. On 19 April 2024 Ms Malone confirmed in an email to Ms Belinda Morgan
of the first respondent that the return to work of the claimant was going
well, and stated that as the suspension was revoked there was no need
for a Designated Contact Person.
290. On 23 April 2024 the second respondent emailed Ms Glancey and said
that “I will aim to bring someone else with me” other than Dr Searle.
291. On 24 April 2024 Dr Pitt provided Ms Glancey with a statement.
292. On 25 April 2025 Dr Searle emailed Ms Glancey stating that she felt
strongly that she should be allowed to accompany the second respondent
to the interview to support the second respondent. Ms Glancey replied that
day confirming that the second respondent had a prior appointment and
could not attend a meeting on the following day.
293. Ms Glancey met Ms Davidson, Ms Curran, and Dr Searle as part of the
investigation on 26 April 2024. The notes of their meetings in each case is
a reasonably accurate record of it. The meeting with Dr Searle took place
before that with the second respondent so that Dr Searle was able to
accompany the second respondent to it. That had been described as not
ideal as Dr Searle was a witness, in an email from Ms Glancey on 18 April
2024.

4104864/2024 Page 62
294. After each meeting a written note was provided, and sent to the person
interviewed who had the opportunity to propose changes. Ms Davidson
and Dr Searle made some changes to the notes sent to each of them.
295. On 30 April 2024 the second respondent was invited by letter to a meeting
on 9 May 2024 by Ms Glancey
296. On a date not given in evidence Dr Searle spoke with Ms Ashraf who the
second respondent had said may be able to give evidence. Ms Ashraf told
Dr Searle that she did not wish to get involved with the matter.
Claim Form
297. The Claim Form in these proceedings was presented to the Tribunal by
the claimant on 2 May 2024.
Interview of second respondent
298. On 6 May 2024 after further exchanges of email with Ms Glancey the
second respondent stated that "as long as it does not negatively impact
the investigation I would like to bring Dr Searle with me as my supportive
person.”
299. On 9 May 2024 the second respondent attended a meeting with Ms
Glancey in order to provide a statement in relation to the investigation. A
note of that meeting was taken, and sent to the second respondent
afterwards. When that note was prepared the recording of the audio of that
conversation was destroyed by the first respondent, as was their general
practice. Also that day Ms Glancey met Dr Pitt. A note of the meeting was
taken.
300. The claimant attended a brief initial meeting with Ms Glancey, attended
also by Mr Fraser and Ms Sinclair-Forrow, at which Ms Glancey explained
that there would be interviews held and that she would be in touch again
within two weeks. [No note of that meeting was provided to the Tribunal]
301. On 13 May 2024 Ms Glancey emailed the second respondent asking who
the nurses were on the shifts relating to what she described as the resus
incident and the incident of the patient leaving without being seen. The
second respondent replied on 14 May 2024 stating that
“Unfortunately I can't remember with certainty who the other nurses
were on the shift when the resus incident occurred. I could make
an educated guess but I couldn't be certain as it was a while ago. I
could probably work out the day it occurred by cross-referencing
rotas with the reg who was on but I'm not sure, sorry. I appreciate
this means it may not be able to be included in the report.”
302. In relation to the other incident the first [misspelt] name of the person was
provided, not a second name which was not known. Ms Glancey identified

4104864/2024 Page 63
that person. Ms Glancey did not review shifts of the claimant and second
respondent in relation to the resus incident.
303. The second respondent wished to review the note of the meeting and after
exchanging emails with Ms Glancey on 14 May 2024 and on the following
day, when Ms Glancey informed the second respondent that the recording
of their meeting had been deleted once the notes were prepared, met with
Ms Glancey to discuss its terms. No note of that meeting was taken, and
no third party was present.
304. On 14 May 2024 Ms Sinclair-Forrow emailed Ms Glancey amending a
draft letter stating “I have added a third allegation in related [sic] to leaving
changing rooms as it is not about her personal choice, it is to demonstrate
on any other occasion she has left the changing room but she chose to
remain in the changing room with Beth on her own which was not her
normal behaviour and again this allows us to tease out why she was there
in the first place given we know she was not there to change.”
305. On 15 May 2024 Ms Glancey intended that a letter was sent to the
claimant which included an allegation that “On any other occasion when
you have entered the changing room and Dr Upton has been present you
have removed yourself from that situation and waited outside until Dr
Upton had left the changing room however on the 24 December 2023 you
made a point of remaining in the changing room on your own with Dr
Upton.” Letters are sent out by an administration team at the first
respondent not Ms Glancey herself. The claimant did not receive that
letter.
306. At the end of the four week period on weekend day shifts in around mid-
May 2024, the claimant returned to undertaking two night shifts per week.
307. On 21 May 2024 the claimant’s solicitor sent the respondents’ solicitor an
email informing the latter of a sexual assault on the claimant when she
was 17 and outlining the circumstances. It was acknowledged the same
day.
308. A revised note of the meeting held on 9 May 2024 was prepared by Ms
Glancey after she met the second respondent to discuss the original note,
which revised note was sent to the second respondent by email on 22 May
2024, who approved it by email reply on 23 May 2024.
309. On 24 May 2024 Ms Glancey emailed Ms Ashraf asking her for a
statement. Ms Ashraf replied on 30 May 2024 to state that “due to limited
information surrounding the incident I will not be providing a statement
however I am happy to have a formal discussion regarding the matter.”

4104864/2024 Page 64
June and July 2024
310. On 11 June 2024 the second respondent emailed a formal complaint
document to Mr Adam Watson, the solicitor advising the first respondent,
who in turn passed it to Ms Sinclair-Forrow stating “I assume this has been
provided to the investigation team? It’s undated but purports to be the
complaint that started the investigation process?”
311. The document provided as a formal complaint included reference to the
incident on 31 October 2023, amongst other matters. It concluded “I hope
that by submitting this complaint it will be acknowledged that this
behaviour is unacceptable and that steps will be taken to prevent it from
happening again such as myself and SP not sharing shift times.”
312. The formal complaint document was forwarded to Ms Glancey by Ms
Hamilton on 12 June 2024.
313. On 13 June 2024 Ms Glancey invited Ms Ashraf to a meeting.
314. On 15 June 2024 Ms Glancey emailed the second respondent asking for
a further meeting.
315. On 18 June 2024 Ms Ashraf emailed an administration assistant at the
first respondent who had informed her of the location of the meeting asking
about representation at it and the date of the incident. Ms Glancey replied
that details could be discussed at the meeting.
316. On 26 June 2024 Ms Glancey emailed the second respondent to state that
a meeting was not required at that time but would be arranged after other
staff had been spoken to.
317. On or around 2 July 2024 Ms Bumba raised with colleagues press interest
in relation to the claimant’s circumstances. A meeting took place between
Ms Nicola Robertson, Ms Belinda Morgan and others on 2 or 3 July 2024
on Teams during which Ms Bumba was contacted and asked for her
advice. Ms Bumba reminded those present that the claimant was entitled
to hold gender critical beliefs and that it was a protected characteristic
under the Equality Act 2010. She also stated that the first respondent
expected staff to show care and compassion.
318. Ms Sandra Raynor, Head of Workforce Resources & Relations of the first
respondent, discussed the press articles with Ms Malone, five of which
had been emailed to her and Ms Beveridge, amongst others, [the articles
were not before the Tribunal] and emailed colleagues on 2 July 2024 about
a suggestion that the claimant had “allegedly discussed the case in detail
with work colleagues (in their own time) that has been reported to Esther
and a statement from the staff member is awaited”. It referred to the
possibility of a new allegation, and suggested that the claimant be
reminded of the expectation of confidentiality under the Conduct Policy by

4104864/2024 Page 65
her line manager. Ms Beveridge replied by email that day to state that
there was “no real trigger to reconsider suspension because there is no
robust evidence to support the rumours circulating.”
319. Ms Malone contacted the NMC for advice in relation to the press interest.
She decided that the claimant should be reminded as to confidentiality. Ms
Malone emailed the claimants line managers Ms Curran and Ms Harris on
3 July 2024 asking them to remind the claimant of the requirement for
confidentiality.
320. On 5 July 2024 shortly after the claimant had started her night shift the
claimant was asked by Ms Harris to speak with her. She instructed the
claimant to avoid discussing the case with anyone other than her
representative to ensure her confidentiality and that of the other parties
involved.
321. No other person involved in the investigation received a similar reminder.
322. On 11 July 2024 the claimant’s solicitor emailed the respondents’ solicitor
about the instruction from Ms Harris, and asked “exactly what it is R1 is
telling her to refrain from discussing and why.”
323. Ms Glancey met Ms Ashraf on 18 July 2024 and the note of their meeting
is a reasonably accurate record of it. Ms Ashraf stated that she
remembers a conversation between the second respondent and claimant
in relation to an incident when a patient had left without being seen, but
also that she could not recall any of the conversation.
Invitation to investigatory meeting
324. On 19 July 2024 the claimant was invited to an investigatory meeting to
address four allegations listed in the letter. It included enclosures of
documents from the investigation. The allegations in that letter were as
follows:
• “Between October 2023 and 18th of December 2023, you were
carrying out observations on a patient within the Resus area of
Emergency Department when Dr Upton came into the cubicle.
Rather than complete what you were doing, you stopped,
walked out of cubicle and told Dr Upton to complete
observations herself. This is not normal practice as when
patients come into ED, everyone has their own roles and
responsibilities. Allegation is of failure to provide patient care.
• 18th of December 2023 you were working in the triage area
when a child left without being seen by medical staff. Dr Upton
asked for your advice and assessment, from triage and you
refused to answer her, choosing to speak through a colleague

4104864/2024 Page 66
(HCSW) who was beside both of you. Allegation is of failure to
communicate regarding patient care.
• On any other occasions when you have entered the changing
room and Dr Upton has been present you have removed
yourself from that situation and have waited outside until Dr
Upton had left the changing room however, on the 24th
December 2023 you made a point of remaining in the changing
room on your own with Dr Upton.
• A complaint that was received in January 2024 which the
complainer categorises as a hate incident. The incident was
alleged to have happened during a night shift 24 – 25th of
December 2023.”
325. On 22 July 2024 the respondents’ solicitor emailed the claimant’s solicitor
regarding Ms Curran’s instruction and stating “The issue was ensuring
confidentiality in terms of the investigation.” It attached the email from Ms
Malone of 3 July 2024. The claimant’s solicitor replied on 24 July 2024 to
state that the policy referred to had not been brought to the claimant’s
attention, asking for it, and stating that the claimant “cannot be prevented
from discussing matters which are of a concern to her (and other
colleagues) in the workplace, namely R1’s alleged unlawful policy of
permitting a man to use a female only workplace changing room.”
August to October 2024
326. The claimant sent on 26 August 2024 a written statement to Ms Glancey
in response to the letter dated 19 July 2024. She set out a detailed
response to each of the allegations. In it she made allegations against the
second respondent in relation to positions held before joining the
department. Ms Glancey did not investigate those allegations considering
them outside the scope of the investigation she was undertaking.
327. An investigatory meeting was held on 30 August 2024 between Ms
Glancey, Ms Mechelle Sinclair-Forrow of HR, a note-taker, the claimant
and her representative Mr Fraser. A note of that meeting is a reasonably
accurate record of it. The meeting date had been postponed at the request
of the claimant.
328. On 1 September 2024 Ms Davidson emailed Ms Glancey stating that she
gave a pack with the risk assessment to Ms Glancey.
329. On 3 September 2024 Dr Searle emailed the second respondent with a
copy to Ms Catriona Fullerton of the first respondent about a failure to
cross check the second respondent’s rota with the rota for the claimant,
which led to a potential for them to be working that evening, and noting
another similar issue for 26 September 2024. The second respondent did
not work on either shift.

4104864/2024 Page 67
330. On 4 September 2024 Ms Glancey emailed the second respondent and
Dr Searle apologising for the length of time the investigation was taking.
331. On 9 September 2024 Ms Sinclair-Forrow emailed Ms Glancey about a
statement Ms Davidson made that she had given the risk assessment
prepared for the claimant’s suspension to Ms Glancey stating “but I am
assuming she is referring to the suspension checklist that you have just
sent me?”
332. On 10 September 2024 Ms Sinclair-Forrow emailed Ms Davidson stating
that she was “muddling up the suspension checklist with the actual risk
assessment.” Ms Davidson did not further respond.
333. The second respondent and Ms Glancey exchanged emails on 22 and 25
September 2024. On 25 September 2024 the second respondent emailed
Ms Glancey in response to a question she had asked about the incident
on 24 – 25 December 2024, whether the second respondent had changed
after leaving the toilet. The second respondent stated that the second
respondent had completely changed before using the toilet. The second
respondent stated that the conversation started at the sink, after which the
second respondent walked around where the claimant was standing, next
to the lockers, to get to a bag.
334. On 27 September 2024 Ms Glancey wrote to the claimant to arrange a
meeting for further matters to be addressed to be held on 14 October
2024. The further matters related to the email from the second respondent
on 25 September 2024.
335. On 27 September 2024 the claimant’s solicitor emailed the respondents’
solicitor noting that the minute of the investigation meeting with the
claimant stated that Ms Glancey said that she did not want to look at the
written statement the claimant had provided. The email stated that the
documents had been sent specifically to be read by the investigating
officer and that it was expected that they be considered in full. The
respondents’ solicitor responded on 27 September 2024 by stating that
the email had been forwarded, and on 30 September 2024 referring to Ms
Glancey had spoken further to the second respondent and that the
documentation referred to in the earlier email “would be referenced in the
eventual investigation report.”
336. On 1 October 2024 the claimant’s solicitor asked the respondents’ solicitor
for a note of the further meeting with the second respondent.
337. On 10 October 2024 Ms Glancey and Ms Sinclair-Forrow met to discuss
the investigation.
338. The claimant sent a document to Ms Glancey on 10 October 2024 with
her further response to the emails of 22 and 25 September 2024.

4104864/2024 Page 68
339. On 11 October 2024 the claimant emailed Ms Glancey, having attempted
to confirm with another member of staff, and stated that she was not
available to meet on 14 October 2024 as she was on holiday. The
respondent’s solicitor emailed the claimant’s solicitor that day to state that
a further meeting was not required. Following that message the meeting
between the claimant and Ms Glancey proposed for 14 October 2024 did
not take place, and was not re-arranged.
November and December 2024
340. On 31 October 2024 Ms Glancey prepared a first draft of her investigation
report. She discussed it with Ms Hamilton.
341. A second draft report was prepared on 4 November 2024.
342. Ms Glancey conducted a further meeting with Ms Davidson on 2
December 2024. The note of their meeting is a reasonably accurate record
of it.
343. On 9 December 2024 Ms Glancey emailed the claimant apologising for
the delay with the report.
344. A final version of the Report was prepared by Ms Glancey and submitted
to the first respondent on 13 December 2024. It recommended that the
claimant be called to a disciplinary hearing. It included for the first time an
allegation of the claimant “misgendering” the second respondent. She
referred to examples of that and added “If part of the allegations under
consideration it will need to be determined at the recommended hearing if
these are SP acceptably expressing her Gender Critical views or if they
are an act of misconduct.”
345. That report was sent to the claimant by email on the same day.
346. By letter [the date for which is not visible in the copy provided to the
Tribunal] Ms Belinda Morgan of the first respondent wrote to the claimant
referring to an email from Ms Shepherd dated 23 December 2024 [which
was not before the Tribunal but is likely to have been a reference to the
email of 13 December 2024] confirming her agreement with the report
recommendation and stating that the evidence justifies a formal conduct
hearing in accordance with the NHS Scotland Conduct Policy.
347. In December 2024 the claimant referred to the second respondent in a
text message to one of those in the said group of friends as “the weirdo”.
January to May 2025
348. On 4 January 2025 the claimant emailed a letter to Ms Glancey
commenting on section 6 and page 21 of the report stating that it was
inaccurate and a misrepresentation of her evidence. It denied a comment
that if the incident recurred the claimant would “have it out” with the second

4104864/2024 Page 69
respondent, but that she “would have to say something” to the second
respondent.
349. On 10 January 2025 Ms Glancey wrote to the claimant to correct her report
when referring to a discussion with Esther Davidson which had noted the
claimant stating that she would “have it out” with the second respondent if
matters happened again. Ms Glancey stated that that was her
interpretation and should have read that the claimant would “say
something” or “confront” the second respondent in such circumstances.
350. On the same date Ms Jillian Torrens, Head of Critical Care and Complex
Services of the first respondent, wrote to the claimant with an invitation to
attend a conduct hearing on 24 January 2025.
351. On 14 January 2025 the claimant emailed Ms Glancey to state that neither
she nor Mr Fraser recalled the claimant using the word “confront”. On the
same date Ms Torrens emailed the claimant to cancel the meeting for 24
January 2025. On 16 January 2025 Ms Glancey wrote to the claimant
agreeing that the words “say something” were accepted in place of
“confront”.
352. On 7 February 2025 the respondents’ solicitor wrote to the Tribunal to
state the position of the first respondent in respect of the investigation
process and the roles of Ms Davidson and Ms Glancey.
Outcome of disciplinary allegations
353. Ms Torrens wrote to the claimant on 15 July 2025 with the result of the
disciplinary allegations against her. It followed a conduct hearing held on
25 June 2025 in the claimant’s absence under the NHS Scotland Conduct
Policy. The allegations were (i) a failure to provide patient care on a date
between October 2023 and 18 December 2023, (ii) a failure to
communicate regarding patient care on the latter date (iii) “on 24 -25th
December 2023 it is alleged you told BU [the second respondent] that she
did not have the correct chromosomes to be within a female changing
room and you made reference to a recent news story that involved a
transgender woman in a female prison. It is alleged that you were
persistent in challenging BU, despite BU’s attempts to de-escalate
matters. The allegation is your actions on 24 – 25th December 2023
amounted to misconduct” and (iv) referred to the second respondent as
“he/him” in discussions with colleagues, and misgendered the second
respondent.
354. For reasons set out in that letter it decided that the evidence against the
claimant was inconclusive or insufficient and to take no action on them. It
stated that the interaction “caused the second respondent visible distress
and impacted on her well-being” in respect of which it was stated that the
claimant as a registered nurse was expected to have the skills and

4104864/2024 Page 70
knowledge to de-escalate and remove herself from the situation. It stated
that a facilitated reflective practice discussion had been arranged to
consider her decision making in relation to the Christmas Eve incident with
the second respondent, which will be supported by a professional nurse
advisor and should be recorded for her submission as part of the next
NMC revalidation.
Other matters
355. Female reproductive organs in most adult females normally are capable
of producing eggs, which are large gametes. Menstruation normally
occurs in females between puberty and menopause. Male reproductive
organs normally are capable of producing sperm, which are small
gametes.
356. A person’s sex is determined by chromosomes, arranged in 23 pairs.
Almost always males have XY chromosomes and almost always females
have XX chromosomes. Chromosomes determine the body’s
development including of reproductive organs, the normal height and
weight ranges for each sex, how the person’s body responds to drugs, and
the normal ranges for blood tests for each sex.
357. Not all persons have only XY or XX chromosomes. Some have XO
chromosomes. Some have XXY or XYY chromosomes. There are some
with a condition known as intersex, with to some extent parts of both male
and female reproductive organs. The incidence of those with such
presentations is generally less than about 0.3%.
358. Some individuals separately have differences of sexual development, by
which their reproductive organs do not fully develop as expected for a
person assigned their sex at birth.
359. Surgery, hormone therapy and other medical interventions for those
undergoing transition of their gender from that assigned at birth do not
change the nature of that person’s chromosomes. Such treatments can
change the physiological attributes of sex. Dependent on outcome such
treatments can make a person assigned male at birth appear to have the
physiological attributes of a female and a person assigned female at birth
appear to have the physiological attributes of a male.
360. When the claimant was about seventeen a male General Practitioner
prescribed medication for heavy periods, stated that there may be side-
effects, and examined her breasts by touching them. The doctor also
showed her how to examine her breasts using his hands to do so. She
considered that to have been a bad experience, and that the doctor had
acted inappropriately towards her. She mentioned that to friends for the
first time about twenty years later, who told her that they thought that that
had been inappropriate.

4104864/2024 Page 71
361. In August 2022 the claimant forwarded a message on a private Messenger
Group to about six colleagues, which contained a series of comments
which were highly offensive and derogatory towards people whose racial
origins was in Pakistan, in the context of there having been a substantial
loss of life.
362. The claimant did not look at the terms of the Bullying and Harassment
Policy of NHS Scotland or the Equality Diversity and Human Rights Policy
of the first respondent in the period August to December 2023 inclusive.
Both were available on the first respondent’s intranet to be viewed by
members of staff.
363. The second respondent had at the material time a mobile telephone which
had an application used to records notes called Google Notes. The
application records the time a note is created, or edited. The application
recorded that a note in relation to the incident on 28 August 2023 was
created on 26 October 2023 at about 3.10am, and edited at 5.15am on 18
December 2023 by providing the claimant’s full name.
364. The note created by the second respondent on 26 October 2023 also
included a note as to an event on 25 October 2023 stating “She did it
again. Sandie was in the changing room when I walked in. Christina
(consultant) came in too. Christina and I chatting. Presumably Sandie left
as I then found her waiting outside to go back in once I’d left. Didn’t even
say hi. Weird.”
365. On 18 December 2023 the note was amended further with the addition of
that date and an entry stating “Working nights, won’t make any eye
contact, won’t acknowledge my present [sic]. Not had a direct
conversation yet but I can feel the dismissal/hostility.” The note was further
amended from 00.33am to 00.58am on 25 December 2023, and on further
occasions as set out in a report by Mr J Borwick dated 14 July 2025.
366. NHS Scotland prepared a draft policy in relation to trans staff which it
issued as what it termed a soft launch in February 2025, by which it was
sent to a restricted number of staff for commentary. The draft was not
proceeded with. No formal written policy in that regard has been produced
by NHS Scotland to date.
367. Ms Bumba the first respondent’s Equality and Human Rights Lead Officer
has below her email signature a logo stating “LGBT Ally” and reference to
the Equality Lead Network.
368. Ms Mechelle Sinclair-Forrow had several periods of absence and other
leave during 2024, and some days of phased returns to work, which
materially impacted on her ability to contribute to the investigation into the
claimant.

4104864/2024 Page 72
369. On 15 January 2025 the respondents’ solicitors wrote to the claimant’s
solicitors providing answers to questions that the latter had asked. It
included that as at 31 March 2024 the first respondent had 9,992
employees. Of those 8448 or very approximately 85% were female, and
1544 or very approximately 15% were male. When providing monitoring
information 32.3% of the employees gave detail as to their gender re-
assignment status. Two stated that they were trans women, and one that
the person was a trans man. The monitoring is undertaken at
commencement of employment, and does not capture changes to gender
re-assignment status during employment. It is likely that there are more
trans members of the first respondent’s staff. An accurate number is not
known, but it is less than 100, and probably materially less than that
number.
370. At the material time the department had very approximately 200
employees, of which very approximately 170 were biologically female and
30 biologically male.
371. Adam Graham was convicted of two offences of rape. After the offences
had been committed he commenced transitioning to female, and used the
name Isla Bryson. When imprisoned initially that was in a female prison.
After a brief period it was changed so as to be in a male prison.
372. A substantially higher proportion of those convicted of crimes of violence
and particularly of sexual violence are those assigned male at birth than
those assigned female at birth, in each case where the person does not
claim to have the protected characteristic of gender reassignment [there
was insufficient evidence before the Tribunal to make any finding in
relation to those who did have that protected characteristic]
373. The second respondent initially agreed to attend a meeting to have the
said mobile phone examined by Mr J Borwick a skilled witness instructed
by the claimant, in or about about March 2025, but that meeting was
cancelled by the claimant’s legal team as Mr Borwick had sought details
of the phone which had not been provided. It was not re-arranged
successfully as details of how it was to be conducted were not agreed
between the parties.
374. On 16 May 2025 the second respondent attended an online meeting with
Mr Watson of the Central Legal Office of the NHS, who was representing
both respondents, and Mr Peter Donaldson of the first respondent. Mr
Donaldson talked the second respondent through how to obtain data
relating to the dates and times of creation of the notes taken by the second
respondent on the mobile phone. Screenshots were taken by the second
respondent. Documents were prepared by the second respondent
following those instructions. Not always throughout that meeting did Mr
Donaldson have sight of what the second respondent was doing, as on
two occasions the second respondent’s screen froze. The data and

4104864/2024 Page 73
screenshots, together with a statement from Mr Donaldson, were then
sent to the claimant’s legal team.
Facts derived from judicial knowledge
375. Physiological attributes of sex are (i) external on the body and can be
observable by the naked eye if the person is clothed, (ii) external on the
body but not observable by the naked eye if the person is clothed and (iii)
internal within the body such as not to be observable by the naked eye
when the person is not clothed. Such attributes are generally found in
either males or females, but are not found in every member of each sex.
External attributes of sex partly visible where the person is not clothed
include reproductive organs.
376. On average males are taller, have greater muscle mass, and different
skeletal structures than females, causing differences in the shape and
proportions of the body of the average male and female, observable when
the person is clothed.
377. There are on average differences in distribution of body hair, with most
adult males having the capacity for facial hair and a greater propensity to
hair loss in later life and more body hair than most adult females.
378. Adult males on average have a lower pitch of voice than adult females,
which is audible when speaking.
379. Internal attributes of sex include some parts of the reproductive organs,
differences in hormones such as most adult males predominantly
producing androgens and most adult females predominantly producing
oestrogens, and differences in chromosomes.
380. An individual may not have all the normal physiological attributes of sex.
For example, a particular male may be less tall, have a lesser muscle
mass and have a higher pitch of voice, than a particular female. As a result
of bodily condition, illness or accident a particular person may not have all
the normal physiological attributes of sex. Not all men are capable of
producing sperm and not all women are capable of producing eggs.
381. Attributes of sex that are not physiological include the names given at
birth, or adopted by an individual by choice during their lives. Most names
are normally associated with being either a male or a female but some
names are associated with both sexes. Such attributes also include the
clothing and shoes traditionally worn by each sex for example a dress by
a woman and trousers by a man; that on average men choose to have
shorter hair length than women; that on average women choose to wear
make-up more frequently than men; and that on average women wear

4104864/2024 Page 74
jewellery such as rings on their fingers and a necklace more frequently
than men.
382. A person of the male sex may wear clothing traditionally considered
female, or a person of the female sex may wear clothing traditionally
considered male; a male may choose to have longer hair than a female or
a female may choose to have shorter hair than a male; a male may wear
make-up or jewellery or a female not do so. In each case that may be done
without that being any part of a gender reassignment process.
Submissions
383. The evidence concluded on 29 July 2025 with the claimant’s further
evidence. The parties had provided skeleton submissions initially as
ordered at the first Preliminary Hearing. The Tribunal informed parties that
it wished written submissions either full, partial or in skeleton form as they
preferred, with a list of authorities agreed between them, by noon on 30
July 2025, and permitted supplementary written submissions by 10am on
25 August 2025. The claimant provided a written submission initially on 30
July 2025, then provided (having been granted an extension) a far more
extensive further written submission in two tranches on 26 August 2025.
The respondents similarly provided a written submission on 30 July 2025
which was an extensive one, and then a more brief supplementary
submission on 25 August 2025. The parties wished to make oral
submissions and they were made on 1 and 2 September 2025. As the
submissions were set out fully in writing, and the oral submissions have
been both recorded and transcribed by stenographers instructed by the
claimant, only the very briefest summary of each submission is provided
at this point in the Judgment. Further aspects of the submissions are
addressed in addressing particular points in the discussion section below.
384. The parties’ representatives provided detailed and substantial
submissions in writing which were supplemented orally, which was clearly
the result of substantial industry from all concerned. We do however have
some concerns over certain aspects of them, for example seeking to
introduce issues of fact which had not been addressed in the evidence.
Both sides in our view sought to do so, and neither should have done so.
There were a small number of errors in the chronology provided by the
claimant as to dates.
385. On 2 September 2025 at the oral submissions, and by email shortly
thereafter as had been discussed, the Tribunal raised some points for
clarification for both sides. Some of the answers provided by the
respondents did not directly engage with the questions asked, or did so in
a particularly vague manner. The claimant sought to make a further
supplementary submission on 13 October 2025 as noted above, which we
address below.

4104864/2024 Page 75
For the claimant
386. As there are full written submissions the following is a very brief outline of
the parties’ respective main argument. Ms Cunningham argued that the
second respondent was male by sex in light of the Supreme Court decision
in FWS, and that permission to allow the second respondent to use the
female changing room had been unlawfully given by the first respondent.
She argued that the claimant had been harassed by the first and second
respondents from the grant of permission, and the circumstances that
occurred on Christmas Eve 2023. She argued that that incident was a
permissible manifestation of the claimant’s beliefs. She invited the
Tribunal to prefer the evidence of the claimant to that of the respondents.
She argued that the first respondent had been involved in a conspiracy to
punish the claimant for expressing her beliefs which were contrary to the
position of the first respondent on matters related to trans members of
staff, and that that had been effected by an unjustified disciplinary process
starting with the suspension and continuing to the end of that process. She
argued that there had been direct discrimination, indirect discrimination,
sexual harassment, harassment by rejection of harassment and
victimisation.
387. She argued that in a number of respects the second respondent had been
lying to the Tribunal, that the first respondents had not provided all
documents required by the order, had not called witnesses who could give
relevant evidence, and that inferences against them should be drawn both
for that. She argued that the first respondent had a delusional belief
system that could only be enforced by bullying, and explained why the
claimant was subjected to a heresy hunt for her refusal to undress with a
male. She asked the Tribunal to find for the claimant in all respects.
For the respondents
388. Ms Russell argued that the evidence for the respondents should be
accepted over that of the claimant. She argued that the claimant had not
been discriminated against, harassed or victimised as had been alleged.
She founded on the Code of Practice:Services, and argued that as the
second respondent was a trans woman it was lawful to permit use of the
female changing room by the second respondent. She argued that the
claimant had impermissibly manifested her beliefs, and had not been
reasonable in her perception of harassment. She further argued that the
reason for the treatment of the claimant was how she had conducted the
Christmas Eve discussion. She argued that the case was not one of direct
discrimination, there had not been harassment of any kind by the
respondents, and that there had not been victimisation. She invited the
Tribunal to dismiss the Claim.

4104864/2024 Page 76
The law
(i) Statute
389. The Equality Act 2010 (“the Act”) consolidated and in part reformed
discrimination law. It implemented the Equal Treatment Directive, relevant
parts of which are set out below.
390. The Act provides, in section 4 which is within Part 2 Equality: Key
Concepts, that each of gender reassignment, religion or belief, and sex
are protected characteristics.
391. Gender reassignment is defined in section 7 as follows
“7 Gender reassignment
(1) A person has the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment if the person is proposing to undergo, is undergoing
or has undergone a process (or part of a process) for the purpose
of reassigning the person’s sex by changing physiological or other
attributes of sex.
(2) A reference to a transsexual person is a reference to a person
who has the protected characteristic of gender reassignment.
(3) In relation to the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment –
(a) a reference to a person who has a particular protected
characteristic is a reference to a transsexual person;
(b) a reference to persons who share a protected
characteristic is a reference to transsexual persons.”
392. Religion or belief is defined in section 10 as follows:
“10 Religion or belief
(1) Religion means any religion and a reference to religion includes
a reference to a lack of religion.
(2) Belief means any religious or philosophical belief and a
reference to belief includes a reference to a lack of belief.
(3) In relation to the protected characteristic of religion or belief—
(a) a reference to a person who has a particular protected
characteristic is a reference to a person of a particular
religion or belief;
(b) a reference to persons who share a protected
characteristic is a reference to persons who are of the
same religion or belief.”
393. Sex is defined in section 11 as follows
“11 Sex
In relation to the protected characteristic of sex –

4104864/2024 Page 77
(a) a reference to a person who has a particular protected
characteristic is a reference to a man or to a woman;
(b) a reference to persons who share a protected
characteristic is a reference to persons of the same sex.”
394. Section 13 provides as follows:
“13 Direct discrimination
(1) A person (A) discriminates against another (B) if, because of a
protected characteristic, A treats B less favourably than A treats or
would treat others.
………
(6) If the protected characteristic is sex—
(a) less favourable treatment of a woman includes less
favourable treatment of her because she is breast-feeding;
(b) in a case where B is a man, no account is to be taken of
special treatment afforded to a woman in connection with
pregnancy, childbirth or maternity.”
395. Section 19 provides as follows:
“19 Indirect discrimination
(1) A person (A) discriminates against another (B) if A applies to B
a provision, criterion or practice which is discriminatory in relation
to a relevant protected characteristic of B's.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a provision, criterion or
practice is discriminatory in relation to a relevant protected
characteristic of B's if—
(a) A applies, or would apply, it to persons with whom B does
not share the characteristic,
(b) it puts, or would put, persons with whom B shares the
characteristic at a particular disadvantage when compared
with persons with whom B does not share it,
(c) it puts, or would put, B at that disadvantage, and
(d) A cannot show it to be a proportionate means of achieving a
legitimate aim.
(3) The relevant protected characteristics are—
• …..gender re-assignment…..
• religion or belief;
• sex….”
396. Section 23 provides as follows:
“Comparison by reference to circumstances
(1) On a comparison of cases for the purposes of sections 13,14
and 19 there must be no material difference between the
circumstances relating to each case….”

4104864/2024 Page 78
397. Section 26 provides as follows:
“26 Harassment
(1) A person (A) harasses another (B) if—
(a) A engages in unwanted conduct related to a relevant
protected characteristic, and
(b) the conduct has the purpose or effect of—
(i) violating B's dignity, or
(ii) creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating
or offensive environment for B.
(2) A also harasses B if—
(a) A engages in unwanted conduct of a sexual nature, and
(b) the conduct has the purpose or effect referred to in
subsection (1)(b).
(3) A also harasses B if—
(a) A or another person engages in unwanted conduct of a
sexual nature or that is related to gender reassignment or
sex,
(b) the conduct has the purpose or effect referred to in
subsection (1)(b), and
(c) because of B's rejection of or submission to the conduct, A
treats B less favourably than A would treat B if B had not
rejected or submitted to the conduct.
(4) In deciding whether conduct has the effect referred to in
subsection (1)(b), each of the following must be taken into
account—
(a) the perception of B;
(b) the other circumstances of the case;
(c) whether it is reasonable for the conduct to have that effect.
(5) The relevant protected characteristics are
…. gender reassignment….
religion or belief….
sex”
398. Section 27 provides as follows:
“27 Victimisation
(1) A person (A) victimises another person (B) if A subjects B to a
detriment because—
(a) B does a protected act, or
(b) A believes that B has done, or may do, a protected act.
(2) Each of the following is a protected act—
………

4104864/2024 Page 79
(d) making an allegation (whether or not express) that A or
another person has contravened this Act.
(3) Giving false evidence or information, or making a false
allegation, is not a protected act if the evidence or information is
given, or the allegation is made, in bad faith.
(4) This section applies only where the person subjected to a
detriment is an individual.
(5) The reference to contravening this Act includes a reference to
committing a breach of an equality clause or rule.”
399. Section 29, within Part 3 Services and Public Functions, provides as
follows:
29 Provision of services, etc.
(1) A person (a “service-provider”) concerned with the provision of
a service to the public or a section of the public (for payment or not)
must not discriminate against a person requiring the service by not
providing the person with the service.
(2) A service-provider (A) must not, in providing the service,
discriminate against a person (B)—
(a) as to the terms on which A provides the service to B;
(b) by terminating the provision of the service to B;
(c) by subjecting B to any other detriment.
(3) A service-provider must not, in relation to the provision of the
service, harass—
(a) a person requiring the service, or
(b) a person to whom the service-provider provides the service.
(4) A service-provider must not victimise a person requiring the
service by not providing the person with the service.
(5) A service-provider (A) must not, in providing the service,
victimise a person (B)—
(a) as to the terms on which A provides the service to B;
(b) by terminating the provision of the service to B;
(c) by subjecting B to any other detriment.
(6) A person must not, in the exercise of a public function that is not
the provision of a service to the public or a section of the public, do
anything that constitutes discrimination, harassment or
victimisation.
(7) A duty to make reasonable adjustments applies to—
(a) a service-provider (and see also section 55(7));
(b) a person who exercises a public function that is not the
provision of a service to the public or a section of the public.
(8) In the application of section 26 for the purposes of subsection
(3), and subsection (6) as it relates to harassment, neither of the
following is a relevant protected characteristic—
(a) religion or belief;
(b) sexual orientation……….”

4104864/2024 Page 80
400. Section 31 provides as follows:
“31 Interpretation and exceptions
(1) This section applies for the purposes of this Part.
(2) A reference to the provision of a service includes a reference to
the provision of goods or facilities.
(3) A reference to the provision of a service includes a reference to
the provision of a service in the exercise of a public function.
(4) A public function is a function that is a function of a public nature
for the purposes of the Human Rights Act 1998.
(5) Where an employer arranges for another person to provide a
service only to the employer's employees—
(a) the employer is not to be regarded as the service-provider,
but
(b) the employees are to be regarded as a section of the public.
(6) A reference to a person requiring a service includes a reference
to a person who is seeking to obtain or use the service.
(7) A reference to a service-provider not providing a person with a
service includes a reference to—
(a) the service-provider not providing the person with a service
of the quality that the service-provider usually provides to the
public (or the section of it which includes the person), or
(b) the service-provider not providing the person with the service
in the manner in which, or on the terms on which, the service-
provider usually provides the service to the public (or the
section of it which includes the person).
(8) In relation to the provision of a service by either House of
Parliament, the service-provider is the Corporate Officer of the
House concerned; and if the service involves access to, or use of,
a place in the Palace of Westminster which members of the public
are allowed to enter, both Corporate Officers are jointly the service-
provider.
(9) Schedule 2 (reasonable adjustments) has effect.
(10) Schedule 3 (exceptions) has effect.”
401. Section 32 provides as follows:
“32 Application of this Part
(1) This Part does not apply to the following protected
characteristics—
(a) age;
(b) marriage and civil partnership.
(2) This Part does not apply to discrimination, harassment or
victimisation—
(a) that is prohibited by Part 5 (work) or Part 6 (education), or
(b) that would be so prohibited but for an express exception.

4104864/2024 Page 81
(3) This Part does not apply to the provision of accommodation if
the provision—
(a) is generally for the purpose of short stays by individuals who
live elsewhere, or
(b) is for the purpose only of exercising a public function or
providing a service to the public or a section of the public.
(4) The reference to the exercise of a public function, and the
reference to the provision of a service, are to be construed in
accordance with Part 3.
(5) This Part does not apply to—
(a) a breach of an equality clause or rule;
(b) anything that would be a breach of an equality clause or rule
but for section 69 or Part 2 of Schedule 7;
(c) a breach of a non-discrimination rule.”
402. Section 39, within Part 5 Work, provides as follows:
“39 Employees and applicants
…….
(2) An employer (A) must not discriminate against an employee of
A's (B)—
(a) as to B's terms of employment;
(b) in the way A affords B access, or by not affording B access,
to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training or for
receiving any other benefit, facility or service;
(c) by dismissing B;
(d) by subjecting B to any other detriment.
…….”
403. Section 40 provides as follows:
“40 Employees and applicants: harassment
(1) An employer (A) must not, in relation to employment by A,
harass a person (B) –
(a) Who is an employee of A’s …….”
404. Section 109, within Part 9 (Enforcement) provides as follows:
“109 Liability of employers and principals
(1) Anything done by a person (A) in the course of A's employment
must be treated as also done by the employer.
(2) Anything done by an agent for a principal, with the authority of
the principal, must be treated as also done by the principal.
(3) It does not matter whether that thing is done with the employer's
or principal's knowledge or approval.
(4) In proceedings against A's employer (B) in respect of anything
alleged to have been done by A in the course of A's employment it

4104864/2024 Page 82
is a defence for B to show that B took all reasonable steps to
prevent A-
(a) from doing that thing, or
(b) from doing anything of that description.
(5) This section does not apply to offences under this Act (other
than offences under Part 12 (disabled persons: transport)).”
405. Section 110 provides as follows:
“110 Liability of employees and agents
(1) A person (A) contravenes this section if-
(a) A is an employee or agent,
(b) A does something which, by virtue of section 109(1) or (2),
is treated as having been done by A's employer or principal
(as the case may be), and
(c) the doing of that thing by A amounts to a contravention of
this Act by the employer or principal (as the case may be).
(2) It does not matter whether, in any proceedings, the employer is
found not to have contravened this Act by virtue of section 109(4).
(3) A does not contravene this section if-
(a) A relies on a statement by the employer or principal that
doing that thing is not a contravention of this Act, and
(b) it is reasonable for A to do so……”
406. Section 111 provides as follows
“111 Instructing, causing or inducing contraventions
(1) A person (A) must not instruct another (B) to do in relation to a
third person (C) anything which contravenes Part 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7 or
section 108(1) or (2) or 112(1) (a basic contravention).
(2) A person (A) must not cause another (B) to do in relation to a
third person (C) anything which is a basic contravention.
(3) A person (A) must not induce another (B) to do in relation to a
third person (C) anything which is a basic contravention.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), inducement may be direct
or indirect.
(5) Proceedings for a contravention of this section may be
brought—
(a) by B, if B is subjected to a detriment as a result of A's
conduct;
(b) by C, if C is subjected to a detriment as a result of A's
conduct;
(c) by the Commission.
(6) For the purposes of subsection (5), it does not matter whether—
(a) the basic contravention occurs;
(b) any other proceedings are, or may be, brought in relation to
A's conduct.

4104864/2024 Page 83
(7) This section does not apply unless the relationship between A
and B is such that A is in a position to commit a basic contravention
in relation to B.
(8) A reference in this section to causing or inducing a person to do
something includes a reference to attempting to cause or induce
the person to do it.
(9) For the purposes of Part 9 (enforcement), a contravention of this
section is to be treated as relating—
(a) in a case within subsection (5)(a), to the Part of this Act
which, because of the relationship between A and B, A is in
a position to contravene in relation to B;
(b) in a case within subsection (5)(b), to the Part of this Act
which, because of the relationship between B and C, B is in
a position to contravene in relation to C.”
407. Section 112 provides as follows:
“112 Aiding contraventions
(1) A person (A) must not knowingly help another (B) to do anything
which contravenes Part 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7 or section 108(1) or (2) or
111 (a basic contravention).
(2) It is not a contravention of subsection (1) if—
(a) A relies on a statement by B that the act for which the help
is given does not contravene this Act, and
(b) it is reasonable for A to do so.
(3) B commits an offence if B knowingly or recklessly makes a
statement mentioned in subsection (2)(a) which is false or
misleading in a material respect.
(4) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (3) is liable on
summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard
scale.
(5) For the purposes of Part 9 (enforcement), a contravention of this
section is to be treated as relating to the provision of this Act to
which the basic contravention relates.
(6) The reference in subsection (1) to a basic contravention does
not include a reference to disability discrimination in contravention
of Chapter 1 of Part 6 (schools).”
408. Section 113 provides as follows:
“113 Proceedings
(1) Proceedings relating to a contravention of this Act must be
brought in accordance with this Part [9]……..
409. Section 114 provides that in Scotland the Sheriff Court has jurisdiction to
determine a claim relating to Parts 3,4, 6 and 7 and a contravention of
sections 108, 111 or 112 that relates to those Parts.

4104864/2024 Page 84
410. Section 120 of the Act provides:
“120 Jurisdiction
(1) An employment tribunal has, subject to section 121 [applicable
to armed forces], jurisdiction to determine a complaint relating
to—
(a) a contravention of Part 5 (work);
(b) a contravention of section 108, 111 or 112 that relates to Part
5……”
411. Section 123 of the Act provides as follows:
“123 Time limits
(1) Subject to section 140A and 140B proceedings on a complaint
within section 120 may not be brought after the end of—
(a) the period of 3 months starting with the date of the act to
which the complaint relates, or
(b) such other period as the employment tribunal thinks just and
equitable…….
(3) For the purposes of this section—
(a) conduct extending over a period is to be treated as done at
the end of the period;
(b) failure to do something is to be treated as occurring when the
person in question decided on it.”
412. Section 136 provides as follows:
“136 Burden of proof
If there are facts from which the tribunal could decide, in the
absence of any other explanation, that a person (A) contravened
the provision concerned the tribunal must hold that the
contravention occurred. But this provision does not apply if A
shows that A did not contravene the provision.”
413. Provisions as to the effect of Early Conciliation are set out in section 140B.
414. Section 149, within Part 11 Advancement of Equality, provides as
follows:
“149 Public Sector Equality Duty
(1) A public authority must, in the exercise of its functions, have
due regard to the need to –
(a) Eliminate discrimination, harassment, victimisation and any
other conduct that is prohibited by or under the Act;
(b) Advance equality of opportunity between persons who
share a relevant protected characteristic and persons who
do not share it

4104864/2024 Page 85
(c) Foster good relations between persons who share a
relevant protected characteristic and persons who do not
share it…….”
415. Section 191, within Part 14 General Exceptions, provides as follows:
“191 Statutory provisions
Schedule 22 (statutory provisions) has effect.”
416. Section 196 provides as follows:
“196 General
Schedule 23 (general exceptions) has effect.”
417. Section 212, within Part 16 General and Miscellaneous provides as
follows:
“212 General Interpretation
(1) In this Act - …. ’man’ means a male of any age; …‘woman’
means a female of any age”……
“detriment does not, subject to subsection (5) include conduct
which amounts to harassment” ……
“substantial” means more than minor or trivial….
(4) A reference (however expressed) to providing or affording
access to a benefit, facility or service includes a reference to
facilitating access to the benefit, facility or service.
(5) “Where this Act disapplies a prohibition on harassment in
relation to a specified protected characteristic, the disapplication
does not prevent conduct relating to that characteristic from
amounting to a detriment for the purposes of discrimination within
section 13 because of that characteristic””
418. Schedule 3 provides as follows:
“Schedule 3 Services and public functions: exceptions
…….
PART 7 SEPARATE, SINGLE AND CONCESSIONARY
SERVICES, ETC
……
Separate services for the sexes
26(1) A person does not contravene section 29, so far as relating
to sex discrimination, by providing separate services for persons of
each sex if—
(a) a joint service for persons of both sexes would be less
effective, and
(b) the limited provision is a proportionate means of achieving a
legitimate aim.

4104864/2024 Page 86
(2) A person does not contravene section 29, so far as relating to
sex discrimination, by providing separate services differently for
persons of each sex if—
(a) a joint service for persons of both sexes would be less
effective,
(b) the extent to which the service is required by one sex makes
it not reasonably practicable to provide the service otherwise
than as a separate service provided differently for each sex,
and
(c) the limited provision is a proportionate means of achieving a
legitimate aim.
(3) This paragraph applies to a person exercising a public function
in relation to the provision of a service as it applies to the person
providing the service.
Single-sex services
27. (1) A person does not contravene section 29, so far as relating
to sex discrimination, by providing a service only to persons of one
sex if— (a) any of the conditions in sub-paragraphs (2) to (7) is
satisfied, and (b) the limited provision is a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim.
(2) The condition is that only persons of that sex have need of the
service.
(3) The condition is that—
(a) the service is also provided jointly for persons of both sexes,
and
(b) the service would be insufficiently effective were it only to be
provided jointly.
(4) The condition is that —
(a) a joint service for persons of both sexes would be less
effective, and
(b) the extent to which the Page 66 service is required by
persons of each sex makes it not reasonably practicable to
provide separate services.
(5) The condition is that the service is provided at a place which is,
or is part of —
(a) a hospital, or
(b) another establishment for persons requiring special care,
supervision or attention.
(6) The condition is that —
(a) the service is provided for, or is likely to be used by, two or
more persons at the same time, and
(b) the circumstances are such that a person of one sex might
reasonably object to the presence of a person of the opposite
sex.
(7) The condition is that —

4104864/2024 Page 87
(a) there is likely to be physical contact between a person (A) to
whom the service is provided and another person (B), and
(b) B might reasonably object if A were not of the same sex as
B.
(8) This paragraph applies to a person exercising a public function
in relation to the provision of a service as it applies to the person
providing the service.”
Gender reassignment
28(1) A person does not contravene section 29, so far as relating
to gender reassignment discrimination, only because of anything
done in relation to a matter within sub-paragraph (2) if the conduct
in question is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.
(2) The matters are—
(a) the provision of separate services for persons of each sex;
(b) the provision of separate services differently for persons of
each sex;
(c) the provision of a service only to persons of one sex.”
419. Schedules 6 to 9 provide for exceptions to Part [none of which are
relevant, or were founded on by the parties, for the purposes of this case].
420. Schedule 19 has a list of organisations which are public authorities for the
Act which includes “A Health Board constituted under section 2 of the
National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978.”
421. Schedule 22 provides as follows:
“SCHEDULE 22 Statutory provisions
Statutory authority
1(1) A person (P) does not contravene a provision specified in the
first column of the table, so far as relating to the protected
characteristic specified in the second column in respect of that
provision, if P does anything P must do pursuant to a requirement
specified in the third column.
Specified provision Protected characteristic Requirement
Parts 3 to 7 Age A requirement of an enactment
Parts 3 to 7 and 12 Disability A requirement of an enactment
A relevant requirement or
condition imposed by virtue of an
enactment
Parts 3 to 7 Religion or belief A requirement of an enactment

4104864/2024 Page 88
A relevant requirement or
condition imposed by virtue of an
enactment
Section 29(6) and Parts 6
and 7 Sex
A requirement of an enactment
Parts 3, 4, 6 and 7
Sexual orientation
A requirement of an enactment
A relevant requirement or
condition imposed by virtue of an
enactment
………..
Protection of women
2(1) A person (P) does not contravene a specified provision only by
doing in relation to a woman (W) anything P is required to do to
comply with—
(a) a pre-1975 Act enactment concerning the protection of
women;
(b) a relevant statutory provision (within the meaning of Part 1
of the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974) if it is done
for the purpose of the protection of W (or a description of
women which includes W);
(c) a requirement of a provision specified in Schedule 1 to the
Employment Act 1989 (provisions concerned with protection
of women at work).
(2) The references to the protection of women are references to
protecting women in relation to—
(a) pregnancy or maternity, or
(b) any other circumstances giving rise to risks specifically
affecting women.
(3) It does not matter whether the protection is restricted to women.
(4) These are the specified provisions—
(a) Part 5 (work);
(b) Part 6 (education), so far as relating to vocational training.
(5) A pre-1975 Act enactment is an enactment contained in—
(a) an Act passed before the Sex Discrimination Act 1975;
(b) an instrument approved or made by or under such an Act
(including one approved or made after the passing of the
1975 Act).
(6) If an Act repeals and re-enacts (with or without modification) a
pre-1975 enactment then the provision re-enacted must be treated
as being in a pre-1975 enactment.

4104864/2024 Page 89
(7) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)(c), a reference to a
provision in Schedule 1 to the Employment Act 1989 includes a
reference to a provision for the time being having effect in place of
it.
(8) This paragraph applies only to the following protected
characteristics—
(a) pregnancy and maternity;
(b) sex.”
422. Schedule 23 provides as follows:
“SCHEDULE 23 General exceptions
Acts authorised by statute or the executive
1(1)This paragraph applies to anything done—
(a) in pursuance of an enactment;
(b) in pursuance of an instrument made by a member of the
executive under an enactment;
(c) to comply with a requirement imposed (whether before or
after the passing of this Act) by a member of the executive
by virtue of an enactment;
(d) in pursuance of arrangements made (whether before or after
the passing of this Act) by or with the approval of, or for the
time being approved by, a Minister of the Crown;
(e) to comply with a condition imposed (whether before or after
the passing of this Act) by a Minister of the Crown.
(2) A person does not contravene Part 3, 4, 5 or 6 by doing anything
to which this paragraph applies which discriminates against
another because of the other’s nationality.
(3) A person (A) does not contravene Part 3, 4, 5 or 6 if, by doing
anything to which this paragraph applies, A discriminates against
another (B) by applying to B a provision, criterion or practice which
relates to—
(a) B’s place of ordinary residence;
(b) the length of time B has been present or resident in or
outside the United Kingdom or an area within it…….
Communal accommodation
3(1) A person does not contravene this Act, so far as relating to sex
discrimination or gender reassignment discrimination, only
because of anything done in relation to—
(a) the admission of persons to communal accommodation;
(b) the provision of a benefit, facility or service linked to the
accommodation.
(2) Sub-paragraph (1)(a) does not apply unless the accommodation
is managed in a way which is as fair as possible to both men and
women.

4104864/2024 Page 90
(3) In applying sub-paragraph (1)(a), account must be taken of—
(a) whether and how far it is reasonable to expect that the
accommodation should be altered or extended or that further
accommodation should be provided, and
(b) the frequency of the demand or need for use of the
accommodation by persons of one sex as compared with
those of the other.
(4) In applying sub-paragraph (1)(a) in relation to gender
reassignment, account must also be taken of whether and how far
the conduct in question is a proportionate means of achieving a
legitimate aim.
(5) Communal accommodation is residential accommodation which
includes dormitories or other shared sleeping accommodation
which for reasons of privacy should be used only by persons of the
same sex.
(6) Communal accommodation may include—
(a) shared sleeping accommodation for men and for women;
(b) ordinary sleeping accommodation;
(c) residential accommodation all or part of which should be
used only by persons of the same sex because of the nature
of the sanitary facilities serving the accommodation.
(7) A benefit, facility or service is linked to communal
accommodation if—
(a) it cannot properly and effectively be provided except for
those using the accommodation, and
(b) a person could be refused use of the accommodation in
reliance on sub-paragraph (1)(a).
(8) This paragraph does not apply for the purposes of Part 5 (work)
unless such arrangements as are reasonably practicable are made
to compensate for—
(a) in a case where sub-paragraph (1)(a) applies, the refusal of
use of the accommodation;
(b) in a case where sub-paragraph (1)(b) applies, the refusal of
provision of the benefit, facility or service.”
(ii) Case law
Direct discrimination
423. The basic question in a direct discrimination case is: what are the grounds
or reasons for the treatment complained of? In Amnesty International v
Ahmed [2009] IRLR 884 the EAT recognised two different approaches
from two House of Lords authorities - (i) in James v Eastleigh Borough
Council [1990] IRLR 288 and (ii) in Nagaragan v London Regional
Transport [1999] IRLR 572.

4104864/2024 Page 91
424. In some cases, such as James, the grounds or reason for the treatment
complained of is inherent in the act itself. It was a case brought under
section 29 (the goods and services provisions) of the Sex Discrimination
Act 1975. The claimant was charged on entry to a public swimming pool
whilst his wife was allowed in free. The Council's policy was to provide free
entrance to the pool for those who had reached pensionable age – at the
time 65 for men and 60 for women. Had the claimant been a woman he
would have been given free entry. Their Lordships considered the test was
a causative one: the question was would he have received the same
treatment as a woman but for his sex? The answer was inevitably, yes,
and the claim of direct discrimination was upheld.
425. For there to be inherent discrimination there must be an exact
correspondence between the protected characteristic and the criterion in
question: Preddy v Bull [2013] UKSC 73.
426. In other cases, such as Nagaragan, the act complained of is not inherently
discriminatory but is rendered so by discriminatory motivation, being the
mental processes (whether conscious or unconscious) which led the
alleged discriminator to act in the way that he or she did. The intention is
irrelevant once unlawful discrimination is made out. That approach was
endorsed in R (on the application of E) v Governing Body of the
Jewish Free School and another [2009] UKSC 15. The Tribunal should
draw appropriate inferences from the conduct of the alleged discriminator
and the surrounding circumstances (with the assistance, where
necessary, of the burden of proof provisions referred to further below) –
as explained in the Court of Appeal case of Anya v University of Oxford
[2001] IRLR 377.
Less favourable treatment
427. Part of the consideration must be of the treatment of the claimant by the
first respondent, not its treatment of others or the claimant’s reasons for
acting as she did. In London Borough of Islington v Ladele [2009] ICR
387; upheld by the Court of Appeal: [2010] ICR 532, later considered at
the European Court of Human Rights as noted below,
a Christian registrar of births, deaths and marriages objected, because of
her religious beliefs, to officiating at same sex civil partnership
ceremonies. Her claim of direct discrimination succeeded before the
Tribunal but failed at the appellate stages. The EAT decision was that the
tribunal had confused the council’s reasons for treating the claimant as it
did with her reasons for acting as she did; that there was no evidence to
support any inference other than that the reason for the alleged
discriminatory acts was the council’s refusal to allow the claimant not to
conduct civil partnerships, and not her religious convictions, even though
that was her reason for refusing to do those duties

4104864/2024 Page 92
428. In Glasgow City Council v Zafar [1998] IRLR 36, a House of Lords case,
it was held that it is not enough for the claimant to point to unreasonable
behaviour. He or she must show less favourable treatment, one of whose
effective causes was the protected characteristic relied on. Although
something more than unreasonable behaviour and the protected
characteristic is required that need not be a great deal: Deman v
Commission for Equality and Human Rights and ors 2010 EWCA Civ
1279.
429. In Shamoon v Chief Constable of the RUC [2003] IRLR 285, also a
House of Lords authority it was held that an unjustified sense of grievance
could not amount to a detriment. In R (ex part Birmingham) v EOC [1980]
AC 1155 it was held that it was not enough for the claimant to believe that
there had been less favourable treatment. The test is an objective one –
HM Land Registry v Grant [2011] ICR 1390.
430. What is superficially the same treatment of men and women may amount
to less favourable treatment. In Smith v Safeway [1996] IRLR 456 the
Court of Appeal held that
“a code which made identical provisions for men and women but
which resulted in one or other having an unconventional
appearance, would have an unfavourable impact on that sex being
compelled to appear in an unconventional mode. Can there be any
doubt that a code which required all employees to have 18-inch
hair, earrings and lipstick, would treat men unfavourably by
requiring them to adopt an appearance at odds with conventional
standards?”
431. It was held in Earl Shilton Town Council v Miller [2023] EAT 5, a case
which concerned toilet provision at work for an employee and was pursued
as a claim under section 13 on the protected characteristic of sex, that:
“In this case it might be said that the same toilet facilities were
provided to men and women and so the treatment was the same.
However, if the treatment is assessed as being the provision of
toilet facilities that are appropriate to a person’s requirements the
analysis may differ……
“Taken from her perspective the claimant was treated less
favourably than men in that she, a woman, was at risk of seeing a
man using the urinals. While a man might see another man use the
urinals, the treatment of the claimant, as a woman, was less
favourable. A woman being at risk of seeing a man using the urinals
is obviously not the same as the risk of a man seeing another man
using the urinals. Put another way, if one starts by considering the
nature of the treatment, the man was not provided with toilet
facilities that were adequate to her needs, because of the risk of

4104864/2024 Page 93
coming across a man using the urinal and the lack of a sanitary bin.
That treatment was less favourable than that accorded to men.”
432. The Employment Tribunal had held that it was a case of inherent
discrimination, and had stated: “It is clear in our judgment that this is a
case of inherent discrimination, referred to in Nagarajan and Amnesty and
exemplified in James.” The EAT held that it was entitled to come to that
view, stating in that regard:
“The employment tribunal correctly concluded that this was a case
in which it did not have to consider the mental process of a
discriminator because the treatment was inherently because of sex.
This was not an “exact correspondence” type case, but one in
which the discrimination was inherent in the treatment. Women
were provided with inadequate toilet facilities in comparison with
men. As in the Birmingham and Coll cases separate facilities, of
a poorer quality, were provided for females than males. That less
favourable treatment was inherently because of sex, just as the
provision of fewer grammar school places for girls in comparison
with boys was inherently because of sex. The facilities were
inadequate for the claimant because she is a woman.”
433. Guidance on what is less favourable treatment is provided in paragraphs
3.4 – 3.6 of the Equality and Human Rights Commission Code of Practice:
Employment (“the Code”).
Comparator
434. In Shamoon Lord Nichols said that a tribunal may sometimes be able to
avoid arid and confusing debate about the identification of the appropriate
comparator by concentrating primarily on why the complainant was treated
as she was, and leave the less favourable treatment issue until after they
have decided what treatment was afforded. Was it on the prescribed
ground or was it for some other reason? If the former, there would usually
be no difficulty in deciding whether the treatment afforded the claimant on
the prescribed ground was less favourable than afforded to another.
435. The comparator, where needed, requires to be a person who does not
have the protected characteristic but otherwise there are no material
differences between that person and the claimant. Guidance was given in
Balamoody v Nursing and Midwifery Council [2002] ICR 646.
436. The law was summarised by the EAT in Martin v Board of Governors of
St Francis Xavier 6th Form College [2024] IRLR 472.
“In order for a comparator to be an actual or statutory comparator,
is not necessary that the circumstances are the same in every
particular…… Whether a point of difference has any significance or
not depends on the nature of the less favourable treatment about

4104864/2024 Page 94
which complaint is made. So, for example, if the complaint is about
the claimant not being selected for a job, whilst the comparator was
selected, the fact that the claimant and comparator have similar
academic qualifications may well be relevant if the job required
developed intellectual skills, but it is not relevant if the job requires
solely manual labour or (to use one of Langstaff P's examples) is
to model clothing.”
437. The Code states at paragraph 3.23 that the circumstances of the claimant
and comparator need not be identical but are sufficient if the same or
nearly the same, and it provides, at paragraph 3.28:
“Another way of looking at this is to ask, 'But for the relevant
protected characteristic, would the claimant have been treated in
that way?'”
Substantial reason
438. In Owen and Briggs v Jones [1981] ICR 618 it was held that the
protected characteristic would suffice for the claim if it was a “substantial
reason” for the decision. In O’Neill v Governors of Thomas More School
[1997] ICR 33 it was held that the protected characteristic needed to be a
cause of the decision, but did not need to be the only or a main cause. In
Igen v Wong [2005] IRLR 258 the test was refined further such that it part
of the reasoning that was more than a trivial part of it could suffice in this
context: it referred to the following quotation from Nagarajan
“Decisions are frequently reached for more than one reason.
Discrimination may be on racial grounds even though it is not the
sole ground for the decision. A variety of phrases, with different
shades of meaning, have been used to explain how the legislation
applies in such cases: discrimination requires that racial grounds
were a cause, the activating cause, a substantial and effective
cause, a substantial reason, an important factor. No one phrase is
obviously preferable to all others, although in the application of this
legislation legalistic phrases, as well as subtle distinctions, are
better avoided so far as possible. If racial grounds or protected acts
had a significant influence on the outcome, discrimination is made
out.'
439. The Court considered arguments as to whether an alternative wording of
no discrimination whatsoever was more appropriate, and the wording of
EU Directives. It concluded as follows:
“In any event we doubt if Lord Nicholls' wording is in substance
different from the 'no discrimination whatsoever' formula. A
'significant' influence is an influence which is more than trivial. “

4104864/2024 Page 95
440. The general issue of treatment because of a protected characteristic is
addressed at paragraphs 3.11 – 3.17 of the Code.
Indirect discrimination
441. Lady Hale in the Supreme Court gave the following general guidance in R
(On the application of E) v Governing Body of Jewish Free School
[2010] IRLR 136:
“Indirect discrimination looks beyond formal equality towards a
more substantive equality of results: criteria which appear neutral
on their face may have a disproportionately adverse impact upon
people of a particular colour, race, nationality or ethnic or national
origins.”
442. The same principle applies for other protected characteristics.
Provision, criterion or practice
443. The provision, criterion or practice (PCP) applied by the employer requires
to be specified. It is not defined in the Act. In case law in relation to the
predecessor provisions of the 2010 Act the courts made clear that it should
be widely construed. In Hampson v Department of Education and
Science [1989] ICR 179 it was held that any test or yardstick applied by
the employer was included in the definition. Guidance on what was a PCP
was given in Essop v Home Office [2017] IRLR 558.
444. In Ishola v Transport for London [2020] IRLR 368 Lady Justice Simler,
as she then was, considered the context of the words PCP and concluded
as follows:
“In context, and having regard to the function and purpose of the
PCP in the Equality Act 2010, all three words carry the connotation
of a state of affairs (whether framed positively or negatively and
however informal) indicating how similar cases are generally
treated or how a similar case would be treated if it occurred again.
It seems to me that ‘practice’ here connotes some form of
continuum in the sense that it is the way in which things generally
are or will be done. That does not mean it is necessary for the PCP
or ‘practice’ to have been applied to anyone else in fact. Something
may be a practice or done ‘in practice’ if it carries with it an
indication that it will or would be done again in future if a
hypothetical similar case arises. Like Kerr J, I consider that
although a one-off decision or act can be a practice, it is not
necessarily one.”
445. The Code states at paragraph 4. 5 as follows:

4104864/2024 Page 96
“The first stage in establishing indirect discrimination is to identify
the relevant provision, criterion or practice. The phrase ‘provision,
criterion or practice’ is not defined by the Act but it should be
construed widely so as to include, for example, any formal or
informal policies, rules, practices, arrangements, criteria,
conditions, prerequisites, qualifications or provisions. A provision,
criterion or practice may also include decisions to do something in
the future – such as a policy or criterion that has not yet been
applied – as well as a ‘one-off’ or discretionary decision.”
Disproportionate impact
446. There must be evidence that shows the PCP creates or would create a
disproportionate impact upon the relevant group, with the group often also
referred to as a pool, and the disproportionate impact often being referred
to as group disadvantage. The first step is to identify the appropriate pool
of employees (Barry v Midland Bank plc [1999] ICR 319). In Allonby v
Accrington and Rossendale College [2001] EWCA Civ 52 it was held
that identifying the pool was not a matter of discretion or of fact-finding but
of logic.
447. Although it is for the claimant to identify the PCP which she seeks to
impugn it is for the Tribunal to determine the appropriate pool, and there
may be - depending on the PCP in issue - a range of logical options open
to it. The EAT so held in Ministry of Defence v DeBique [2010] IRLR
471:
“In reaching their decision as to the appropriate pool in a particular
case, a tribunal should undoubtedly consider the position in respect
of different pools within the range of decisions open to them; but
they are entitled to select from that range the pool which they
consider will realistically and effectively test the particular allegation
before them.”
448. The Court of Appeal held in Grundy v British Airways plc [2008] IRLR
74 that “Provided it tests the allegation in a suitable pool, the tribunal
cannot be said to have erred in law even if a different pool, with a different
outcome, could equally legitimately have been chosen.”
449. In Essop v Home Office (UK Border Agency); Naeem v Secretary of
State for Justice [2017] ICR 640 Lady Hale explained one of the salient
features of the legislation as follows:
“Indirect discrimination assumes equality of treatment - the PCP is
applied indiscriminately to all - but aims to achieve a level playing
field, where people sharing a particular protected characteristic are
not subjected to requirements which many of them cannot meet but
which cannot be shown to be justified. The prohibition of indirect

4104864/2024 Page 97
discrimination thus aims to achieve equality of results in the
absence of such justification. It is dealing with hidden barriers which
are not easy to anticipate or to spot.”
450. The requirement for group disadvantage was thus that “many “within that
group cannot meet a requirement from a PCP. She expanded on that as
follows:
“There is no requirement that the PCP in question put every
member of the group sharing the particular protected characteristic
at a disadvantage. The later definitions cannot have restricted the
original definitions, which referred to the proportion who could, or
could not, meet the requirement. Obviously, some women are taller
or stronger than some men and can meet a height or strength
requirement that many women could not. Some women can work
full time without difficulty whereas others cannot. Yet these are
paradigm examples of a PCP which may be indirectly
discriminatory….”
451. As to proving disadvantage it was held that: “it is commonplace for the
disparate impact, or particular disadvantage, to be established on the
basis of statistical evidence.” The extent of disadvantage was addressed
as follows “At the level of the group the disadvantage may be no more
than likely but that does not make it a different disadvantage from the
actual disadvantage suffered by those who are affected. The difference is
between potential and actual disadvantage but the disadvantage is the
same.”
452. On the nature of the pool for group disadvantage it was held that:
“. … all the workers affected by the PCP in question should be
considered. Then the comparison can be made between the impact
of the PCP on the group with the relevant protected characteristic
and its impact upon the group without it. This makes sense. It also
matches the language of s.19(2)(b) which requires that “it” – ie the
PCP in question – puts or would put persons with whom B shares
the characteristic at a particular disadvantage compared with
persons with whom B does not share it. There is no warrant for
including only some of the persons affected by the PCP for
comparison purposes. In general, therefore, identifying the PCP will
also identify the pool for comparison.”
453. How many would be disadvantaged within a group had earlier been
addressed by the Court of Appeal in Eweida v British Airways plc [2010]
ICR 890. It held a narrow view would be other uniformed BA staff who
wished to wear a cross in a visible place; a wide view would operate where
evidence showed that there were others in society who shared the
material religion or belief and so would suffer a disadvantage were they to

4104864/2024 Page 98
be BA employees; an intermediate view would operate by assuming that
the workforce included such others and asking if they would be adversely
affected by the relevant requirements. The court held that all three
approaches have difficulties.
454. In Games v University of Kent UKEAT/0524/13 it was held that statistical
information was not necessary: if it existed it would be “important material”
but that “the evidence of the claimant and others in his group might suffice
and could provide compelling evidence of disadvantage even if there are
no statistics at all.”
455. There may however a need for evidence where the issue is in dispute,
dependent on what that dispute is. That was addressed by the EAT
in Page v NHS Trust Development Authority UKEAT/0183/18, which
was appealed to the Court of Appeal but not on this point.
456. The Court of Appeal held that a sole holder of a belief may not be sufficient
to establish group disadvantage in Mba v Mayor and Burgesses of the
London Borough of Merton [2014] IRLR 145. That was followed by the
EAT in Trayhorn v Secretary of State for Justice [2018] IRLR 502 which
held that “the threshold of s 19(2)(b) is not a high one. However, as Lord
Justice Elias held in Mba, it is there and cannot be ignored. Whether it has
been surmounted is a question of fact in each case.”
457. In Essop the Supreme Court made the following comments:
“A third salient feature is that the reasons why one group may find
it harder to comply with the PCP than others are many and various
… They could be social, such as the expectation that women will
bear the greater responsibility for caring for the home and family
than will men …”
458. In Cumming v British Airways plc UKEAT/0337/19 that quotation was
referred to in relation to sufficiency of evidence as follows:
“there may be an argument that Lady Hale’s general proposition
was sufficient to establish the case along with the statistics relating
to the whole of the crew or that in any event there was no reason
to think that the proportion of men in the crew with childcare
responsibilities differed materially from the proportion of females
with such responsibilities”.
459. In Dobson v North Cumbria Integrated Care NHS Foundation Trust
[2021] ICR 1699 the EAT stated the following:
“. ... particular disadvantage can be established in one of several
ways, including the following: a. There may be statistical or other
tangible evidence of disadvantage. However, the absence of such
evidence should not usually result in the claim of indirect

4104864/2024 Page 99
discrimination (and of group disadvantage in particular) being
rejected in limine; b. Group disadvantage may be inferred from the
fact that there is a particular disadvantage in the individual case.
Whether or not that is so will depend on the facts, including the
nature of the PCP and the disadvantage faced. Clearly, it may be
more difficult to extrapolate from the particular to the general in this
way when the disadvantage to the individual is because of a unique
or highly unusual set of circumstances that may not be the same
as those with whom the protected characteristic is shared; c. The
disadvantage may be inherent in the PCP in question; and/or d.
The disadvantage may be established having regard to matters,
such as the childcare disparity, of which judicial notice should be
taken. Once again, whether or not that is so will depend on the
nature of the PCP and how it relates to the matter in respect of
which judicial notice is to be taken.”
460. The limitations to taking judicial notice were explained as follows:
“A matter in respect of which judicial notice may be taken, by its
very nature, ought to be one that is uncontroversial. The fact that it
is not might cast doubt on whether it really is so notorious and well-
established that it can be accepted without further inquiry.”
461. In assessing the impact of the PCP upon the affected group, it is
necessary for the Tribunal to ascertain both the quantitative and the
qualitative effect: University of Manchester v Jones [1993] ICR 474). In
so doing, the individual situation of the claimant may provide relevant
evidence, although (as for the determination of particular disadvantage):
“... proper attention [must be] paid to the question of how typical
they are of any other men and women adversely affected by the
requirement.”
462. These are matters also referred to in the Code at paragraphs 4.15 – 4.22.
Paragraph 4.19 provides that once the pool has been identified the
question for the Tribunal is whether there is a particular disadvantage to
people sharing the relevant protected characteristic; that means that a
comparison must be made between the impact of the PCP on the people
within the pool with, and without, the protected characteristic. The
particular disadvantage can be shown by direct evidence, inference from
primary fact, statistical materials, or by judicial knowledge (the term
normally used in Scotland which is the equivalent of what is known as
judicial notice in England and Wales and is addressed further below). At
paragraph 4.21 it is said that “Whether a difference is significant will
depend on the context, such as the size of the pool and the numbers
behind the proportions. It is not necessary to show that the majority of
those within the pool who share the protected characteristic are placed at
a disadvantage.”

4104864/2024 Page 100
Objective justification
463. The statutory test for justification requires to be read in accordance with
case law from the Court of Justice of the European Union. In Homer v
Chief Constable of West Yorkshire Police and West Yorkshire Police
Authority [2012] IRLR 601 decided in the Supreme Court Lady Hale said:
“Although the [UK legislation] refers only to a 'proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim', this has to be read in the light of the Directive
which it implements”. She added in summary that “to be proportionate, a
measure has to be both an appropriate means of achieving the legitimate
aim and (reasonably) necessary in order to do so.”
464. It is for the employer to establish the defence on the balance of
probabilities. Evidence is not always required. The EAT in Chief
Constable of West Yorkshire Police and West Yorkshire Police
Authority v Homer [2009] ICR 223 (considered on other grounds by the
Supreme Court [2012] IRLR 601) stated:
''… it is an error to think that concrete evidence is always necessary
to establish justification, and the ACAS guidance should not be
read in that way. Justification may be established in an appropriate
case by reasoned and rational judgment. What is impermissible is
a justification based simply on subjective impression or stereotyped
assumptions”.
465. Where the PCP is a general policy which has been adopted in order to
achieve a legitimate aim, it is the proportionality of the policy in terms of
the balance between the importance of the aim and the impact on the
class who will be put at a disadvantage by it which must be considered
rather than the impact on the individual. In Seldon v Clarkson Wright
and Jakes the EAT said: 'Typically, legitimate aims can only be achieved
by the application of general rules or policies. The adoption of a general
rule, as opposed to a series of responses to particular individual
circumstances, is itself an important element in the justification. It is what
gives predictability and consistency, itself an important virtue.' This was
approved by the Court of Appeal and by the Supreme Court [2012] IRLR
590), where Lady Hale commented on the passage just quoted:
“Thus the EAT would not rule out the possibility that there may be
cases where the particular application of the rule has to be justified,
but they suspected that these would be extremely rare. I would
accept that where it is justified to have a general rule, then the
existence of that rule will usually justify the treatment which results
from it.”
466. The issue of objective justification need not have been considered by the
employer at the time of the dispute arising. In Cadman v Health and
Safety Executive [2004] IRLR 971 the Court of Appeal held that there is

4104864/2024 Page 101
no rule of law that the justification must have consciously and
contemporaneously featured in the decision-making processes of the
employer. But it may be more difficult for an employer to discharge the
burden of establishing justification where there is no evidence to show that
it ever applied its mind to the question of whether there was another way
of achieving the legitimate aim that would avoid or diminish the disparate
adverse impact on the protected group: Hockenjos v Secretary of State
for Social Security [2005] IRLR 471.
467. In MacCulloch v ICI [2008] IRLR 846 the EAT set out four principles, later
approved by the Court of Appeal in Lockwood v DWP [2013] IRLR 941,
as follows:
(i) The means to achieve the aim must correspond to a real need
for the organisation
(ii) They must be appropriate with a view to achieving the
objective
(iii) They must be reasonably necessary to achieve that end
(iv) The Tribunal is to weigh the reasonable needs of the
undertaking against the discriminatory effect of the employer’s
measure and make its own assessment of whether the former
outweigh the latter.
468. The Supreme Court held in Essop that there can be no finding of indirect
discrimination until all four elements of the definition are met. Lady Hale
held:
“some reluctance to reach this point can be detected in the cases,
yet there should not be.…The requirement to justify a PCP should
not be seen as placing an unreasonable burden upon respondents.
Nor should it be seen as casting some sort of shadow or stigma
upon them. There is no shame in it. There may well be very good
reasons for the PCP in question – fitness levels in fire-fighters or
policemen spring to mind.”
469. In applying the test of reasonable necessity there may be more than one
option which would constitute a proportionate means of achieving the
legitimate aim in question - Health and Safety Executive v Cadman
[2005] ICR 1546. An employer is not required to prove there was no other
way of achieving its objectives - Hardys & Hansons place v Lax [2005]
IRLR 726 - but in considering the needs of the respondent the Tribunal
must make its own judgement upon “a fair and detailed analysis of the
working practices and business considerations involved”.
470. Care must be taken by tribunals not to reject a justification case on the
basis that a respondent should have pursued a different aim which would

4104864/2024 Page 102
have had a less discriminatory impact: Harrod v Chief Constable of
West Midlands Police [2017] ICR 869
471. In Ladele the EAT and Court of Appeal addressed the issue of
proportionality having identified the legitimate aim in the case. The Court
of Appeal endorsed the EAT decision, quoting from it and then
commenting as follows:
“Once it is accepted that the aim of providing the service on a non-
discriminatory basis was legitimate—and in truth it was bound to
be—then … it must follow that [Islington] was entitled to require
all registrars to perform the full range of services.”
472. As the EAT had stated, permitting the claimant to refuse to perform civil
partnerships “would necessarily undermine the council’s clear
commitment to” what the appeal tribunal described as their “non-
discriminatory objectives which [they] thought it important to espouse both
to their staff and the wider community”.
473. Ultimately this along with other claims was considered by the European
Court of Human Rights, reported as Eweida, Ladele, McFarlane and
Chaplin v The United Kingdom [2013] IRLR 231 in which it was held
that:
“Both Ms Ladele who objected to officiating at same-sex civil
partnership ceremonies, and Mr McFarlane who objected to
providing psycho-sexual counselling to same-sex couples, based
their objections on their Christian beliefs. Those manifestations
were to be protected unless interference was necessary in a
democratic society for the protection of the rights and freedoms of
others. The equal opportunities policies of the employers in these
cases were designed to ensure the provision of services without
discrimination—including on the ground of sexual orientation. The
state had not been found to have failed to protect the art 9 rights of
either of these applicants in seeking to strike a balance between
the rights of the two employees to manifest their religious belief and
the employer's interest in securing the rights of others.'
474. Proportionality is considered at paragraphs 4.30 – 4.32 of the Code.
Relationship with direct discrimination
475. In R(Coll) v Secretary of State for Justice [2017] UKSC 40 it was held
that direct discrimination and indirect discrimination are mutually exclusive
concepts.
Harassment
General

4104864/2024 Page 103
476. Guidance was given by the then Mr Justice Underhill in Richmond
Pharmacology v Dhaliwal [2009] IRLR 336, in which he said that it is a
'healthy discipline' for a tribunal to go specifically through each
requirement of the statutory wording, [in relation to the predecessor
provision] pointing out particularly that (1) the phrase 'purpose or effect'
clearly enacts alternatives; (2) the proviso in sub-s (2) is there to deal with
unreasonable proneness to offence (and may be affected by the
respondent's purpose, even though that is not per se a requirement); (3)
'on grounds of' is a key element which may or may not necessitate
consideration of the respondent's mental processes (and it may exclude a
case where offence is caused but for some other reason) [the wording is
now “related to” however]; (4) while harassment is important and not to be
underestimated, it is 'also important not to encourage a culture of
hypersensitivity or the imposition of legal liability in respect of every
unfortunate phrase'.
477. The Supreme Court in FWS commented on harassment in the following
terms:
“To establish harassment, it is simply necessary to establish a
sufficient link between the unwanted conduct and a relevant
protected characteristic, and that the conduct violates dignity or
creates an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive
environment for the claimant. It follows that, as with section 13(1)
EA 2010, under section 26(1)(a) the complainant, B, does not have
to possess the relevant protected characteristic to bring an unlawful
harassment claim. Conduct will fall within this section where it is
related to B’s own protected characteristic, or where it is related to
a relevant protected characteristic of another person or persons.
Applied, for example, to the case of a trans woman with a GRC,
who presents as a woman at work and is perceived as a woman,
and whose trans status and GRC are confidential: if a colleague
harasses her (by making sexualised references to what she is
wearing, or degrading comments about how she looks) she can
bring a claim for harassment related to sex. She can also bring a
harassment claim related to the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment but may not wish to do so.”
Environment
478. The extent of the protection conferred by the section was examined by the
Court of Appeal in Land Registry v Grant 2011 IRLR 748 which focused
on the words “intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating and offensive”
and said:

4104864/2024 Page 104
“Tribunals must not cheapen the significance of these words. They
are an important control to prevent trivial acts causing minor upset
being caught”.
479. There can be harassment under this provision arising from an isolated
incident; for an example, see Lindsay v London School of Economics
[2014] IRLR 218.
480. In Weeks v Newham College of Further Education UKEAT/0630/11 the
EAT stated the following:
“A decision of fact in a context such as this must be sensitive to all
the circumstances. Context is all-important. ……..We would urge
caution for a tribunal in placing too much weight upon timing. Where
conduct is directed toward the sex of the victim, it may be very
difficult for the victim personally, socially and, in particular, in some
circumstances, culturally, to make any immediate complaint about
it. The fact of there being no immediate complaint cannot prevent a
complaint being justified, but equally we cannot say that it is a factor
that a tribunal is not entitled to consider as part and parcel of the
overall circumstances that it has to gauge….. However, it must be
remembered that the word is “environment”. An environment is a
state of affairs. It may be created by an incident, but the effects are
of longer duration.”
Related to
481. The test for “related to” is different to that for whether conduct is “because
of” a characteristic. It is a broader and more easily satisfied test – Tees
Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust v Aslam and another
EAT 0039/19. The fact that a claimant considers the conduct related to a
particular characteristic is not necessarily determinative, nor is a finding
about the motivation of the alleged harasser. There must be some basis
from the facts found which properly leads it to the conclusion that the
conduct in question is related to the particular characteristic in the manner
alleged in the claim. The Tribunal should consider the matter objectively.
482. The position has been considered in a number of cases including Warby
v Wunda Group Plc EAT 0434/11 in which the EAT upheld a Tribunal’s
decision that an employee accused by her superior of having lied about a
miscarriage was not subjected to conduct “related to” her sex within the
meaning of the sex discrimination provisions then in force. It was held that
the tribunal had been entitled to find that the accusation was made in the
context of a dispute over a work matter, about which the employer
believed that the employee was lying. Thus the conduct complained of
was a complaint about alleged lying; it was not made because of the
employee’s sex, because she was pregnant or because she had had a
miscarriage.

4104864/2024 Page 105
483. In Kelly v Covance Laboratories Ltd [2016] IRLR 338 an instruction not
to speak Russian at work, so that any conversations could be understood
by English speaking managers, was held to be not related to race or
national origins, even though it potentially could have been. The conduct
was because the employer was suspicious about what was being said and
could not understand. Viewed in the context of the company’s business
and risks the employer’s explanation for the conduct was accepted and
the conduct was not related to race or national origins.
484. In UNITE the Union v Nailard [2018] IRLR 730 the Tribunal had held that
a failure to address a sexual harassment complaint made against elected
officials of the union could amount to harassment related to sex “because
of the background of harassment related to sex”. The Court of Appeal
considered that went too far. There was a reminder that Tribunals should
focus on the conduct of the person who carried out the act and determine
whether that conduct is related to the protected characteristic (not whether
the conduct of someone else or some other conduct is related to the
protected characteristic).
485. There should be an intense focus on the context in which the words or
behaviour took place Bakkali v Greater Manchester [2018] IRLR 906, in
which the question was whether a comment as to whether an individual
was said to be still promoting ISIS/Daesh was related to race. The
Tribunal found it was not as it related to a previous conversation. The EAT
again emphasised that context is important and the words used must be
seen in context. In considering whether the conduct is related to the
protected characteristic there should be an intense focus on the context
of the offending words or behaviour. The mental processes of the
perpetrator are relevant in assessing the issue.
486. In Raj v Capita UKEAT 0074/2019 the EAT upheld a Tribunal which had
found that the massage at his desk by a manager was not conduct related
to sex. The conduct was misguided encouragement by a manager. It was
an isolated incident and the context was key: a standing manager over a
sitting team member in a gender neutral part within an open plan office.
In that case the Tribunal did not expressly consider the burden of proof
provisions but had found that the conduct was in no sense whatsoever
related to sex.
487. In British Bung Manufacturing Company Ltd v Finn [2024] ICR 1375
a colleague called the male claimant a 'bald' followed by an offensive
word. The EAT upheld the employment tribunal's finding that this was
'related to sex' even though some women are also bald. There was no
authority, said the EAT, for the proposition that in order for unwanted
conduct to relate to sex it must relate to a matter which is both inherent in
the gender in question and in no-one of the opposite gender, and such a
proposition ran contrary to the purpose of section 26.

4104864/2024 Page 106
488. Further guidance was given in Carozzi v University of Herfordshire
[2024] EAT 169 in which it is stated that
“the term ‘related to’ is designed to have a relatively broad meaning.
The harassment provisions are designed to be pragmatic,
balancing the interests of employees against those of their
employer and colleagues who may be accused of harassment. That
balance is not achieved by applying a limited meaning to the words
“conduct related to a protected characteristic”.
489. In Windsor Clive v Forsbrook [2024] EAT 183 it was said that:
“the concept cannot be so broad as to be meaningless. I am of the
view that, as Ms Roddick argues, the conduct must relate to the
protected characteristic, here disability, in some clear way. It is for
the ET to spell out that relationship between the conduct and the
disability. It will be necessary, therefore, for an ET to identify with
some clarity the precise conduct which creates the prohibited
environment.”
490. Para 7.9 of the Code states that the provisions in section 26 should be
given 'a broad meaning in that the conduct does not have to be because
of the protected characteristic'. This was applied in Hartley v Foreign and
Commonwealth Office UKEAT/0033/15 where it was held that whether
there is harassment must be considered in the light of all the
circumstances; in particular, where it is based on things said it is not
enough only to look at what the speaker may or may not have meant by
the wording.
491. At paragraph 7.10 of the Code the breadth of the words “related to” is
noted and some examples are provided. It gives one such example of a
female worker who has a relationship with her male manager. On seeing
her with another male colleague, the manager suspects she is having an
affair. As a result, the manager makes her working life difficult by
criticising her work in an offensive manner. The behaviour is not because
of the sex of the female worker but because of the suspected affair, which
is related to her sex. This could amount to harassment related to sex. At
paragraph 7.11 the Code states that in the examples there was “a
connection with the protected characteristic”.
Reasonable perception
492. In Pemberton v Inwood [2018] IRLR 542 the claimant alleged direct
discrimination arising from the revocation of his permission to officiate
('PTO') as a Church of England priest and refusal to grant him an Extra
Parochial Ministry Licence ('EPML') because he had entered into a same-
sex marriage, contrary to the doctrines of the Church. The Tribunal held
that the claimant’s view was not reasonable as he had entered into his

4104864/2024 Page 107
marriage knowing it was considered contrary to Church doctrine and
would have the consequence that his PTO would be revoked and an
EPML refused. It also held that the enforcement of those decisions
involved no aggravating features. The Court of Appeal (approving the
decision of the EAT) upheld the tribunal's decision. It held that the
claimant's understanding of the position formed part of the relevant
context and the employment tribunal had been entitled to take it into
account when determining whether his response was reasonable. More
specifically, given that the conduct in question was covered by the defence
permitted by the Equality Act 2010, Schedule 9, paragraph 2, if there were
no aggravating factors, it could not be unreasonable for that conduct to
have the effect proscribed in s 26(1)(b): 'to conclude otherwise would
make a nonsense of providing the defence to Schedule 9 in the first place'.
493. In Driskel v Peninsula Business Services Ltd [2000] IRLR 151 the
EAT held that although the ultimate judgment as to whether conduct
amounts to unlawful harassment involves an objective assessment by the
tribunal of all the facts, the claimant's subjective perception of the conduct
in question must also be considered and that throughout the tribunal
should remain conscious of the burden and standard of proof.
494. The Tribunal is required to determine both the actual effect on the
particular individual complainant and the question whether that was
reasonable in the circumstances of the case - Fidessa plc v Lancaster
UKEAT/0093/16 in which an appeal was allowed on the basis that the
employment tribunal, whilst finding that it would have been reasonable for
the particular conduct to have had the necessary effect, had failed to make
a finding as to what the effect on the claimant had been.
495. In Ali v Heathrow Express Operating Co Ltd [2022] IRLR 558 as part
of a security exercise at Heathrow a suspicious package was placed in a
public part of the airport to see if it would be discovered by staff. It had
wires sticking out of it and written on it the phrase 'Allahu Akbar' in Arabic.
The claimant, a Muslim, learned about it in an email giving the results of
the security exercise. The Tribunal held that in the circumstances it had
not been reasonable to take the offence that he had. Those circumstances
included in particular that the employer had been carrying out the security
exercise in the light of recent terrorist incidents in which the phrase had
been used and the claimant should have appreciated this. The EAT held
that the ET had been within its discretion in reaching this decision.
496. The issue of what might be harassment was addressed in Forstater which
included that
“Referring to a trans person by their pre-GRC gender in any of the
settings in which the EqA applies could amount to harassment
related to one or more protected characteristics ; whether or not it
does will depend, as in any claim of harassment, on a careful

4104864/2024 Page 108
assessment of all relevant factors, including whether the conduct
was unwanted, the perception of the trans person concerned and
whether it is reasonable for the impugned conduct to have the effect
of creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or
offensive environment for the trans person. A simple example of a
situation where referring to a trans person by their pre-GRC gender
would probably not amount to harassment is where the trans
person in question is happy to discuss their trans status or is
sympathetic to or shares the Claimant’s gender-critical belief.
A trans person could potentially bring a claim for harassment
related to gender reassignment (where the definition under s.7(2)
is satisfied), sex (see e.g. P v S and Cornwall County Council
[1996] ICR 795 at paras 17 to 22), disability based on the conditions
of Gender Dysphoria or Gender Identity Disorder (see EHRC Code
at para 2.28), or even a philosophical belief that gender identity is
paramount and that a trans woman is woman.”
Sexual harassment
497. The Code addresses the issue of sexual harassment at paragraphs 7.12
and 7.13, as including “unwelcome sexual advances, touching, some
forms of sexual assault, sexual jokes, displaying pornographic
photographs or drawings or sending emails with material of a sexual
nature.”
Rejection of harassment
498. The Code comments on the issue of rejection of harassment at
paragraphs 7.14 and 7.15. It comments at paragraph 7.19 on the position
of a public authority and on whether the alleged perpetrator was exercising
any Convention rights.
Victimisation
499. There are two key questions – (i) has the claimant done a protected act
and (ii) if so did she suffer a detriment because she had done so, which is
a causation test - Greater Manchester Police v Bailey [2017] EWCA Civ
425. The House of Lords explained the principle on the basis of
predecessor legislation in Chief Constable of the West Yorkshire Police
v Khan [2001] ICR 1065 as follows “The primary object of
the victimisation provisions … is to ensure that persons are not penalised
or prejudiced because they have taken steps to exercise their statutory
rights or are intending to do so”..
500. It is not necessary to state specifically that there has been a breach of the
Act for there to be a protected act - Waters v Metropolitan Police
Commissioner [1997] ICR 1073 in which the Court of Appeal stated: “All

4104864/2024 Page 109
that is required is that the allegation relied on should have asserted facts
capable of amounting in law to an act of discrimination by an employer
within the terms of s 6(2)(b).” It is also not necessary to state specifically
that the allegation is of discrimination in relation to one of the protected
characteristics.: Durrani v London Borough of Ealing
UKEAT/0454/2012. In Page v Lord Chancellor UKEAT/0304/18/LA it
was confirmed that to be a protected act the claimant must have made an
allegation that is sufficient to amount to one of discrimination.
501. In Kokomane v Boots Management Services Ltd [2025] EAT 38 the
EAT considered the terms of a complaint to the employer, and the overall
circumstances, and stated that:
“It appears to me the law could be summed up in this way: what is
necessary is that the ET should take account of all of the factors
that are provided in the information given by the employee to the
employer. In addition the ET needs to consider that information on
the basis of how it would be understood by the employer in context.
It would be understood by the employer, in part, because of the
general facts about the employee and the place of work, which the
employer would know of in any event. In terms, that the employee's
complaint should be considered by the ET by examining the way
that it would be understood by the employer. When the employee
makes the complaint explicit that will be an easy task. When the
complaint is oblique the context becomes important……
The ET should have been taking account of all these factors and
asking the question what would the respondent have understood
from the complaint or would have understood the complaint to
mean from the information provided by the claimant as part of her
complaint. That understanding would include the factors which
were known to the respondent.”
502. If it is shown that a protected act has taken place and that the claimant
has been subjected to a detriment, it is essentially a question of the
“reason why” that occurred. The protected act must be an effective and
substantial (in the sense of more than minor or trivial) cause of the
treatment, it does not need to be the sole or principal cause. The Tribunal
is concerned with establishing what were the reasons (whether from
consciously or subconsciously) for the detriment.
503. In determining whether a detriment was because of a protected act, it is
important that the protected act is identified with precision and that the
relationship between the detriment and that act specifically is examined:
JJ Food Service Ltd v Mohamud EAT 0310/15. The Tribunal has to
consider not just whether or not the protected acts themselves were the
reason but whether or not there are any other factors relating to the

4104864/2024 Page 110
protected acts which were in the respondents’ mind when taking
decisions.
504. An approach that distinguishes between a protected act and the manner
of doing that act was endorsed in Martin v Devonshires Solicitors 2011
ICR 352. The EAT held that there were cases where the reason for the
dismissal (or any other detriment) was not the protected act as such but
some feature of it which could properly be treated as separable — such
as the manner in which the protected act was carried out.
505. There is no requirement in victimisation claims to show that the alleged
discriminator was wholly motivated to act by the claimant’s behaviour in
carrying out a protected act. Where there is more than one motive
involved, all that is needed is that the discriminatory reason should be of
sufficient weight - O'Donoghue v Redcar and Cleveland Borough
Council [2001] IRLR 615.
506. The Code addresses victimisation in Chapter 9. It stresses at paragraph
9.10 that making a protected act need not be the only reason for the
detriment, but is one of them.
(iii) Other matters
Detriment
507. The word “detriment” is defined in section 212) only as “detriment does
not subject to subsection (5) include conduct which amounts to
harassment”. Subsection (5) is where a prohibition on harassment is
disapplied. Detriment is otherwise not defined.
508. In Ministry of Defence v Jeremiah [1980] ICR 13, the Court of Appeal
held that a detriment exists “if a reasonable worker would take the view
that the treatment was to his detriment”, and essentially the same test was
applied by Lord Hope in Shamoon, who held that an unjustified sense of
grievance cannot amount to a detriment. There is a need to show that any
alleged detriment is objectively regarded as such as discussed by the
House of Lords in St Helens Metropolitan Borough Council v
Derbyshire [2007] ICR 841.
509. The application of the Shamoon principles to detriment for the purposes
of victimisation was confirmed in Warburton v Chief Constable of
Northamptonshire Police [2022] ICR 925 in which the EAT summarised
the principles as being that detriment is to be interpreted widely and it is
not necessary to establish any physical or economic consequence. It is
enough that a reasonable worker might take such a view, such that the
bar is not particularly high.

4104864/2024 Page 111
510. The EAT held in Greasley-Adams v Royal Mail Group Ltd [2023] ICR
1021 that in the absence of knowledge of a fact it cannot amount to a
detriment.
Burden of proof
511. Section 136 implemented the Burden of Proof Directive 1997/80/EC which
remains of effect as assimilated law, a matter addressed below. There is
a two-stage process in applying the burden of proof provisions in
discrimination and victimisation claims, arising in relation to whether the
decisions challenged were “because of” the relevant protected
characteristic, as explained in the authorities of Igen v Wong [2005] IRLR
258, and Madarassy v Nomura International Plc [2007] IRLR 246, both
from the Court of Appeal. The claimant must first establish a first base or
prima facie case by reference to the facts made out. If she does so, the
burden of proof shifts to the respondent at the second stage. If the second
stage is reached and the respondent’s explanation is inadequate, it is
necessary for the tribunal to conclude that the claimant’s allegation in this
regard is to be upheld. If the explanation is adequate, that conclusion is
not reached. In Hewage v Grampian Health Board 2012 IRLR 870 the
Supreme Court approved the guidance from those authorities.
512. In Ayodele v Citylink Ltd [2018] ICR 748, the Court of Appeal rejected
an argument that the Igen and Madarassy authorities could no longer
apply as a matter of European law, and held that the onus did remain with
the claimant at the first stage. That it was for the claimant to establish
primary facts from which the inference of discrimination could properly be
drawn, at the first stage, was then confirmed in Royal Mail Group Ltd v
Efobi [2019] IRLR 352 at the Court of Appeal, and upheld at the Supreme
Court, reported at [2021] IRLR 811. The Supreme Court said the following
in relation to the terms of section 136(2):
“At the first stage the tribunal must consider what inferences can
be drawn in the absence of any explanation for the treatment
complained of. That is what the legislation requires. Whether the
employer has in fact offered an explanation and, if so, what that
explanation is must therefore be left out of account.”
513. In Igen the Court of Appeal had said the following in relation to the
requirement on the respondent to discharge the burden of proof if a prima
facie case was established, the second stage of the process if the burden
of proof passes from the claimant to the respondent:
“To discharge that burden it is necessary for the respondent to
prove, on the balance of probabilities, that the treatment was in no
sense whatsoever on the grounds of sex, since ‘no discrimination
whatsoever’ is compatible with the Burden of Proof Directive.”

4104864/2024 Page 112
514. The same principle applies where other protected characteristics are
relied on. Efobi at the Supreme Court also addressed the issue of the
failure to call a witness, and in summary stated that whether any positive
significance should be attached to the fact that a person has not given
evidence depends entirely on the context and particular circumstances.
Relevant considerations will include such matters as whether the witness
was available to give evidence, what relevant evidence it is reasonable to
expect that the witness would have been able to give, what other relevant
evidence there was bearing on the point(s) on which the witness could
potentially have given relevant evidence, and the significance of those
points in the context of the case as a whole. All these matters are, the
court said, inter-related and how these and any other relevant
considerations should be assessed cannot be encapsulated in a set of
legal rules.
515. The Tribunal must also consider the possibility of unconscious bias, as
addressed in Geller v Yeshurun Hebrew Congregation [2016] ICR
1028. It was an issue addressed in Nagarajan.
516. Unreasonable behaviour of itself is not sufficient to found discrimination,
but it may be inferred if there is no explanation for unreasonable behaviour
(The Law Society v Bahl [2003] IRLR 640 (EAT), upheld by the Court of
Appeal at [2004] IRLR 799. It may also be inferred if there was what in
England and Wales is referred to as disclosure, as addressed in EB v BA
2006 IRLR 471. There is not the same process of disclosure in Scotland,
but a material failure to comply with an order for documents is a broad
equivalent of that.
517. In Chapman v Simon [1994[ IRLR 124 the Court of Appeal gave
guidance about drawing an inference of discrimination, which must be
from primary facts that have been found, Lord Justice Longmore stating:
“In order to justify an inference, a Tribunal must first make findings
of primary fact from which it is legitimate to draw the inference. If
there are no such findings, then there can be no inference: what is
done can at best be speculation.” Lord Justice Peter Gibson stating:
“It is of the greatest importance that the primary facts from which
such inference is drawn are set out with clarity by the tribunal in its
fact-finding role, so that the validity of the inference can be
examined. Either the facts justifying such inference exist or they do
not, but only the tribunal can say what those facts are. An intuitive
hunch, for example, that there has been unlawful discrimination is
insufficient without facts being found to support that conclusion.”
518. The Supreme Court considered the drawing of inferences in the Tribunal
in Royal Mail Group Ltd v Efobi [2021] UKSC 33, in which Lord Leggatt
stated that drawing inferences was a matter of ordinary rationality and that

4104864/2024 Page 113
Employment Tribunals should be free to draw, or decline to draw,
inferences using their common sense.
519. In the context of the claim of indirect discrimination under section 19
findings must be made as to the 'provision, criteria or practice' being
applied and as to the question of 'disadvantage'. When considering a claim
of failure to make reasonable adjustments under the predecessor
provisions to the Act, which has similar concepts in part, the EAT held
in Project Management Institute v Latif [2007] IRLR 591:
“we very much doubt whether the burden shifts at all in respect of
establishing the provision, criterion or practice or demonstrating the
substantial disadvantage. These are simply questions of fact for the
tribunal to decide after hearing all the evidence, with the onus of
proof resting on the Claimant.”
520. In Bethnal Green & Shoreditch Educational Trust v
Dippenaar UKEAT/0064/15 that principle was applied to a claim under
section 19. It is therefore for a claimant to prove primary facts in relation
to both the PCP and the group and personal particular disadvantage
before the reversal of proof provision is engaged for such a claim. It is then
for the respondent to prove the defence of a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim.
Jurisdiction
521. The Employment Tribunal has been described as a “creature of statute”,
by which is meant that it only has the jurisdiction conferred on it by
Parliament. There is a partial conferring of jurisdiction on the Tribunal
within the Act as set out above, and discussed further below.
522. Whether there is conduct extending over a period was considered to
include where an employer maintains and keeps in force a discriminatory
regime, rule, practice or principle which has had a clear and adverse effect
on the complainant - Barclays Bank plc v Kapur [1989] IRLR 387. The
Court of Appeal has cautioned tribunals against applying the concepts of
'policy, rule, practice, scheme or regime' too literally, particularly in the
context of an alleged continuing act consisting of numerous incidents
occurring over a lengthy period (Hendricks v Metropolitan Police
Commissioner, [2003] IRLR 96).
523. Where a claim is submitted out of time, there is no formal burden of proof
for a claimant to show that it is just and equitable to allow it to be received
is on the claimant, but there is a burden on a claimant to persuade the
Tribunal to exercise its discretion (Polystar Plastic Ltd v Liepa [2023]
EAT 100.

4104864/2024 Page 114
524. The Inner House reviewed the just and equitable provision in the case of
Malcolm v Dundee City Council 2012 SLT 457 and held that the issue
of whether a fair trial was possible was “one of the most significant factors”
in the exercise of the discretion that the section confers. It is not, however
determinative of its own.
525. In Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University Local Health
Board v Morgan [2018] ICR 1194 the Court of Appeal emphasised the
width of the discretion given to the Tribunal. That was emphasised further
in Adedeji v University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation [2021]
EWCA Civ 23, which discouraged use of what has become known as the
Keeble factors as form of template for the exercise of discretion.
526. The EAT recently reviewed the issue in Jones v Secretary of State for
Health and Social Care [2025] EAT 76.
Statutory construction
527. Part of the consideration of the issues in the case involves construing the
terms of the 2010 Act. The principles of statutory interpretation were
summarised by the Supreme Court in FWS at paragraphs 8 – 14, which
stressed the need to do so giving words their ordinary meaning.
(i) European law as assimilated law
528. There was, prior to the UK’s withdrawal from the European Union, a need
to interpret the Act purposively, meaning in accordance with the purposes
of the Equal Treatment Directive it implemented, and the relevant case
law in relation to that Directive from the ECJ and CJEU. In that regard the
observations in Litster v Forth Dry Dock & Engineering Co Ltd [1989]
ICR 341 are often cited, in which in the House of Lords it was said in
relation to the principle of purposive construction although in relation to a
different Directive
“The Courts of the United Kingdom are under a duty to follow the
practice of the European Court of Justice by giving a purposive
construction to directives and to regulations issued for the purpose
of complying with directives. Such purposive construction will be
applied even though, perhaps, it may involve some departure from
the strict and literal application of the words which the legislature
has enacted to use.”
529. In Uber BV v Aslam [2021] ICR 657 the general principle was expressed
in the Supreme Court as follows:
“The modern approach to statutory interpretation is to have regard
to the purpose of a particular provision and to interpret its language,
so far as possible, in the way which best gives effect to that
purpose”.

4104864/2024 Page 115
530. The position has been changed by the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from
the European Union. There are now provisions for assimilated law under
the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018, as amended by the Retained
EU Law (Revocation and Reform) Act 2023. These provisions preserve,
subject to qualifications, the case law of the Court of Justice where the
decision was issued before 31 December 2020, under section 6(7). The
analysis required in this regard is impacted by section 5A of the 2018 Act
as amended by the 2023 Act. The relevant terms of that section are as
follows:
“5 Exceptions to savings and incorporation
(A1) The principle of the supremacy of EU law is not part of
domestic law.
This applies after the end of 2023, in relation to any enactment or
rule of law (whenever passed or made).
(A2) Any provision of assimilated direct legislation—
(a) must, so far as possible, be read and given effect in a way
which is compatible with all domestic enactments, and
(b) is subject to all domestic enactments, so far as it is
incompatible with them……….
(A4) No general principle of EU law is part of domestic law after the
end of 2023…..
(8) In this section “domestic enactment” means an enactment other
than one consisting of assimilated direct legislation.”
531. Section 20(1) of the 2018 Act as amended defines “assimilated direct
legislation” as that it “means any direct EU legislation which forms part of
domestic law by virtue of section 3 (as modified by or under this Act or by
other domestic law from time to time, and including any instruments made
under it on or after IP completion day.” By s 3(2), the expression
“direct EU legislation” means any “EU decision” is defined in s 20(1) to
include EU case law.
532. As a broad summary of the law from these provisions we consider that (at
this level, of the Employment Tribunal) CJEU case law remains binding on
unless it applies a general principle of EU law, such as proportionality,
equivalence or effectiveness where the decision was issued on or before
31 December 2020. For decisions after that date an Employment
Tribunals is not bound by it, but it may be taken into account if considered
to be persuasive.
(i) The Equal Treatment Directive
533. The Equal Treatment Directive 2000/78/EU includes the following:
“Article 1
Purpose

4104864/2024 Page 116
The purpose of this Directive is to lay down a general framework
for combating discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief,
disability, age or sexual orientation as regards employment and
occupation, with a view to putting into effect in the Member States
the principle of equal treatment.
Article 2
Concept of discrimination
1. For the purposes of this Directive, the "principle of equal
treatment" shall mean that there shall be no direct or indirect
discrimination whatsoever on any of the grounds referred to in
Article 1.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1:
(a) direct discrimination shall be taken to occur where one person
is treated less favourably than another is, has been or would be
treated in a comparable situation, on any of the grounds referred to
in Article 1;
(b) indirect discrimination shall be taken to occur where an
apparently neutral provision, criterion or practice would put persons
having a particular religion or belief, a particular disability, a
particular age, or a particular sexual orientation at a particular
disadvantage compared with other persons unless:
(i) that provision, criterion or practice is objectively justified by a
legitimate aim and the means of achieving that aim are
appropriate and necessary, or
(ii) as regards persons with a particular disability, the employer
or any person or organisation to whom this Directive applies, is
obliged, under national legislation, to take appropriate measures
in line with the principles contained in Article 5 in order to
eliminate disadvantages entailed by such provision, criterion or
practice.
3. Harassment shall be deemed to be a form of discrimination within
the meaning of paragraph 1, when unwanted conduct related to any
of the grounds referred to in Article 1 takes place with the purpose
or effect of violating the dignity of a person and of creating an
intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive
environment. In this context, the concept of harassment may be
defined in accordance with the national laws and practice of the
Member States.

4104864/2024 Page 117
4. An instruction to discriminate against persons on any of the
grounds referred to in Article 1 shall be deemed to be discrimination
within the meaning of paragraph 1.
5. This Directive shall be without prejudice to measures laid down
by national law which, in a democratic society, are necessary for
public security, for the maintenance of public order and the
prevention of criminal offences, for the protection of health and for
the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
Article 3
Scope
1. Within the limits of the areas of competence conferred on the
Community, this Directive shall apply to all persons, as regards
both the public and private sectors, including public bodies, in
relation to:
(a) conditions for access to employment, to self-employment or to
occupation, including selection criteria and recruitment conditions,
whatever the branch of activity and at all levels of the professional
hierarchy, including promotion;
(b) access to all types and to all levels of vocational guidance,
vocational training, advanced vocational training and retraining,
including practical work experience;
(c) employment and working conditions, including dismissals and
pay;……….”
534. The CJEU has applied the principle from the ECtHR case of Eweida
discussed below in Achbita v G4S Secure Solutions NV: C-157/15,
ECLI:EU:C:2017:203, [2017] IRLR 466 and Bougnaoui v Micropole
SA: C-188/15, ECLI:EU:C:2017:204, [2017] IRLR 447 in which female
employees had been dismissed for refusing to comply with a prohibition
by their employers on wearing Islamic headscarves at work. In our view
these cases remain binding as assimilated law.
535. In both cases the court held that the prohibition could potentially be
objectively justified as something done for the legitimate aim of 'the pursuit
by the employer, in its relations with its customers, of a policy of political
philosophical or religious neutrality' (Achbita) or presenting a 'neutrality
vis a vis its customers' (Bougnaoui). On the issue of proportionality the
court in Achbita held that regard was to be had to whether the policy was
pursued in a consistent and systematic manner, and whether it was
imposed only on those with customer contact given that that was part of
the aim.

4104864/2024 Page 118
536. There is later case law of the CJEU in this aspect being IX v WABE eV: C-
804/18, and MH Müller Handels GmbH v MJ: C-341/19, heard together
and reported at [2021] IRLR 832, and OP v Commune d'Ans C-
148/22, [2024] IRLR 206, but they were decided after the UK left the
European Union, are decided in part on the EU Charter, and in our view
are not sufficiently persuasive that we should take them into account.
(ii) Human Rights
537. A similar but different purposive construction is appropriate where an issue
of human rights is engaged under section 3 of the 1998 Act, as addressed
in the House of Lords in Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza [2004] 2 AC 557.
The principle has been applied both to issues of European law, and human
rights. The statutory provision may be interpreted flexibly to accord with
the purpose of the Directive or so as not to breach the Convention,
provided that doing so does not go against the grain of the legislation.
Further authorities on human rights are set out below.
538. The approach an Employment Tribunal should take to such an issue was
considered, in the different context of a claim of unfair dismissal, in X v Y
[2004] IRLR 625. Lord Justice Mummery gave guidance in such a case,
which involved a private not public sector employer. It referred to a
structured approach to considering whether Convention rights were
engaged, and in the context of fairness of a dismissal to ask “is the
dismissal fair, tested by the provisions of s.98 of the ERA, reading and
giving effect to them under s.3 of the HRA so as to be compatible with the
Convention right?”
539. For the avoidance of doubt we add that this case is not one raised directly
on the basis of human rights, which the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
over. The issue of human rights is only an aid to construction, not a claim
pursued before us.
540. The terms of the European Convention on Human Rights (“ECHR”) are to
be considered when construing legislation, under the terms of the Human
Rights Act 1998 (“the 1998 Act”), section 3 of which requires that:
“3. Interpretation of legislation.
(1) so far as is possible to do so, primary legislation and
subordinate legislation must be read and given effect in a way
which is compatible with the convention rights.
(2) This section applies -
to primary legislation and subordinate legislation whenever
enacted”
541. Section 6 provides:
“6. Acts of public authorities.

4104864/2024 Page 119
(1) It is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which is
incompatible with a Convention right.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to an act if—
(a) as the result of one or more provisions of primary legislation,
the authority could not have acted differently; or
(b) in the case of one or more provisions of, or made under,
primary legislation which cannot be read or given effect in a
way which is compatible with the Convention rights, the
authority was acting so as to give effect to or enforce those
provisions.
(3) In this section “public authority” includes—
(a) a court or tribunal, and
(b) any person certain of whose functions are functions of a
public nature,
but does not include either House of Parliament or a person
exercising functions in connection with proceedings in Parliament.
542. Section 7 provides
“7. Proceedings
(1) A person who claims that a public authority has acted (or
proposes to act) in a way which is made unlawful by section 6(1)
may —
(a) bring proceedings against the authority under this Act in the
appropriate court or tribunal, or
(b) rely on the Convention right or rights concerned in any legal
proceedings,
but only if he is (or would be) a victim of the unlawful act.”
543. The following Articles of the ECHR are included within convention rights
and are set out in Schedule 1 to the 1998 Act:
“Article 8
Right to respect for private and family life:
(1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
his home and his correspondence.
(2) There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national
security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
Article 9:
Freedom of thought, conscience and religion:

4104864/2024 Page 120
(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief
and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public
or private, to manifest his religion or belief, in worship, teaching,
practice and observance.
(2) Freedom to manifest one’s religion or beliefs shall be subject
only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary
in a democratic society in the interests of public safety, for the
protection of public order, health or morals, or for the protection of
the rights and freedoms of others.
Article 10
Freedom of expression:
(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall
include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart
information and ideas without interference by public authority and
regardless of frontiers. This article shall not prevent states from
requiring the licensing of broadcasting, television or cinema
enterprises.
(2) The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties
and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions,
restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary
in a democratic society, in the interests of national security,
territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the
reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of
information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority
and impartiality of the judiciary.”
544. Whilst not a Convention right, the terms of Article 1 of the Convention state
as follows:
“Article 1
Obligation to respect Human Rights
The High Contracting Parties shall secure to everyone within their
jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in Section 1 of this
Convention.”
545. The ECtHR held that a person’s body is the most intimate aspect of the
right to a private life in YF v Turkey, Case. No. 24209/94, decided on 22
July 2003.
546. Where Convention rights give rise to competing interests, the House of
Lords in Re S (a child) [2004] 4 All ER 683 said:
“… neither article has as such precedence over the other … where
the values under the two articles are in conflict, an intense focus on

4104864/2024 Page 121
the comparative importance of the specific rights being claimed in
the individual case is necessary … the justifications for interfering
with or restricting each right must be taken into account. Finally, the
proportionality test must be applied to each …”
547. In Evans v United Kingdom Application no. 6339/05 the ECtHR
considered the competing Article 8 rights of a male and female in relation
to embryos from IVF treatment. After their relationship ended the male
withdrew consent for use of the embryos. The female, who was otherwise
unable to have her own children, argued unsuccessfully that there had
been a breach of her Article 8 rights. The court held that there required to
be a fair balance between the rights of the male and female, and that the
UK law governing the matter was within the margin of appreciation. The
rights of each of the male and female were treated as if equal, and the
court stated that:
“The Court is not persuaded by the applicant’s argument that the
situation of the male and female parties to IVF treatment cannot be
equated and that a fair balance could in general be preserved only
by holding the male donor to his consent. While there is clearly a
difference of degree between the involvement of the two parties in
the process of IVF treatment, the Court does not accept that the
Article 8 rights of the male donor would necessarily be less worthy
of protection than those of the female; nor does it regard it as self-
evident that the balance of interests would always tip decisively in
favour of the female party.”
548. In Mba v Mayor and Burgesses of the London Borough of Merton
[2014] IRLR 145 the claimant objected to working on Sundays due to her
Christian beliefs and pursued an indirect religious discrimination claim
under regulation 3 of the Employment Equality (Religion or Belief)
Regulations 2003. The majority of the Court of Appeal held that
“domestic law must be read so as to be consistent with Convention
rights where possible, in accordance with s.3 of the Human Rights
Act. In my judgment, it is simply not possible to read down the
concept of indirect discrimination to ignore the need to establish
group disadvantage. But I see no reason why the concept of
justification should not be read compatibly with Article 9 where that
provision is in play. In that context it does not matter whether the
claimant is disadvantaged along with others or not, and it cannot in
any way weaken her case with respect to justification that her
beliefs are not more widely shared or do not constitute a core belief
of any particular religion. It is for this reason that in my view the
employment tribunal was wrong to make reference to this factor as
one assisting the employer.

4104864/2024 Page 122
This is not to say that the number of employees sharing a particular
belief will necessarily be irrelevant to a justification challenge where
Article 9 is engaged. Assuming that the employer's criterion is
designed to achieve a legitimate end, the greater the number of
employees affected, the more difficult it is likely to be for an
employer to accommodate those beliefs in a way which is
compatible with his business objectives. So paradoxically, if a belief
is not widely shared, which is more likely to be the case where it is
not a core belief of a particular religion, that is a factor which under
Article 9 is likely to work in favour of the employee rather than
against.”
549. In P v Poland [2025] IRLR 393 the ECtHR did not find that an Article 10(2)
defence had been made out as the basis for dismissing an employee for
social media posts that were made, summarising matters as follows:
“the Court concludes that the domestic authorities did not provide
‘relevant and sufficient reasons’ for dismissing the applicant from
his position. Even allowing for a certain margin of appreciation, it
cannot be held that the applicant's personal blogging activity
threatened the protection of morals of minors in a manner justifying
the sanction imposed on him. Therefore, the interference with his
right to freedom of expression neither corresponded to a pressing
social need, nor was it proportionate to the legitimate aim
purportedly pursued. It thus was not “necessary in a democratic
society”.
The development of the law relating to gender reassignment
550. For the vast majority of people the concepts of sex and gender are
congruent. What those two terms mean was addressed by the Supreme
Court in Elan-Cane v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2021] UKSC 56. The claimant was assigned female at birth and after
surgery decided on a non-gendered status. The issue was whether it was
lawful for the respondent to require passport holders to identify as M
(male) or F (female), when it was possible to use the identifier X under
International Civil Aviation Organisation provisions for passports, which
included those identifying as non-gendered. Lord Reed said the following
in his speech:
“The term “gender” is used in this context to describe an individual’s
feelings or choice of sexual identity, in distinction to the concept of
“sex”, associated with the idea of biological differences which are
generally binary and immutable.”
551. The House of Lords held that there was no recognised non-gendered sex,
such that under UK law a person’s sex was either male or female.

4104864/2024 Page 123
552. There has been a lengthy development of the law in relation to what a
person’s sex is where there is an incongruence between sex assigned at
birth and their perception of their gender or sex. The developments have
not always followed a linear path, and there is to an extent an interplay
between the European Convention on Human Rights, and case law in
relation to the rights under it, as well as decisions of the Court of Justice
and domestic decisions in Great Britain. European law and human rights
law provisions are nevertheless distinct.
553. The first detailed examination of whether a person was male or female by
sex of which we are aware is the Outer House decision of Lord Hunter in
Forbes-Sempill, Petitioners (unreported) (29 December 1967), which
involved consideration of evidence given as to the circumstances of a
person who argued that he was a hermaphrodite with predominantly male
characteristics such that he was a male, but had XX chromosomes and
elements of both male and female genitalia. The court concluded that the
person was a man. The issue of chromosomes was not considered
determinative, and a view from all the evidence led was taken. It was
however essentially a biological assessment of sex for someone who had
been assigned female at birth, but where the evidence presented was that
the person was of the male sex, and a certificate of correction of the birth
certificate had separately and earlier been made essentially it would
appear on the basis that the assigning of female sex at birth had been an
error. The decision was reached after hearing evidence of male sexual
function, and took account of all the circumstances including psychological
elements.
554. It may be of assistance to quote some of the decision in that case, as it is
not reported, and we have added that, together with more lengthy
quotations from certain of the cases which follow, in an Appendix.
555. The next consideration as to the sex of a person is found in Corbett v
Corbett [1971] P 83, a case from the High Court, which included a
detailed examination of biological details ascertained with the benefit of
substantial expert evidence. It set out a biological test of sex, being
chromosomal, gonadal and genital tests, and if all were congruent that
established sex. It held that it was fixed at birth. The Outer House decision
just referred to appears not to have been cited to it.
556. In Rees v. United Kingdom (application no. 9532/81) on which
judgment was given on 17 October 1986, the European Court of Human
Rights (“ECtHR”) held that Articles 8 and 12 had not been breached in
respect of a trans man who had sought to amend the birth certificate
issued as female to male. The Court also held that a “need for appropriate
legal measures should therefore be kept under review having regard
particularly to scientific and societal developments.”

4104864/2024 Page 124
557. In P v S and Cornwall County Council (Case C-13/94) [1996] ICR 79
the European Court of Justice (“ECJ”) held that the Equal Treatment
Directive (Council Directive 76/207/EEC) required Member States to
prohibit discrimination arising from gender reassignment. The claimant in
the case informed the employer of an intention to undergo gender
reassignment. There was an initial period during with the claimant dressed
and behaved as a woman. After initial surgical procedures the claimant
was given notice of dismissal on the ground of redundancy, and after the
notice but before that expired underwent more extensive surgical
procedures. The claimant claimed sex discrimination and argued that
there had not been a genuine redundancy. The respondent argued that
gender reassignment could not be sex discrimination.
558. The Tribunal referred the matter to the ECJ which referred to Rees and
stated:
“the term ‘transsexual’ is usually applied to those who, whilst
belonging physically to one sex, feel convinced that they belong to
the other; they often seek to achieve a more integrated,
unambiguous identity by undergoing medical treatment and
surgical operations to adapt their physical characteristics to their
psychological nature. Transsexuals who have been operated upon
thus for a fairly well-defined and identifiable group” (judgment of 17
October 1986 in Rees v United Kingdo, paragraph 38, series A, No
106)”
559. It held that that was the expression of the fundamental principle of equality
under Community Law and that:
“Accordingly, the scope of the directive cannot be confined simply
to discrimination based on the fact that a person is of one or other
sex. In view of its purpose and the nature of the rights which it seeks
to safeguard, the scope of the directive is also such as to apply to
discrimination arising, as in this case, from the gender
reassignment of the person concerned.”
560. That case was part of the background to the enactment of the Sex
Discrimination (Gender Reassignment) Regulations 1999, which
amended the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 to prohibit direct discrimination
on the grounds of gender reassignment in employment.
561. Goodwin v United Kingdom [2002] IRLR 664 held that the state’s failure
to recognise the legal status of a post operative transsexual person was a
breach of Article 8 rights. In so holding the ECtHR Rights held:
“In short, the unsatisfactory situation in which post-operative
transsexuals live in an intermediate zone as not quite
one gender or the other is no longer sustainable. Domestic

4104864/2024 Page 125
recognition of this evaluation may be found in the report of the
Interdepartmental Working Group and the Court of Appeal's
judgment of Bellinger v Bellinger (see paragraphs 50, 52–53)”.
562. It also made the following more general comment when it considered the
possible consequences of a change to the status of trans persons:
“The Court considers that society may reasonably be expected to
tolerate a certain inconvenience to enable individuals to live in
dignity and worth in accordance with the sexual identity chosen by
them at great personal cost.”
563. The following was said in relation to Article 8 rights:
“Nonetheless, the very essence of the Convention is respect for
human dignity and human freedom. Under Article 8 of the
Convention in particular, where the notion of personal autonomy is
an important principle underlying the interpretation of its
guarantees, protection is given to the personal sphere of each
individual, including the right to establish details of their identity as
individual human being. In the twenty first century the right of
transsexuals to personal development and to physical and moral
security in the full sense enjoyed by others in society cannot be
regarded as a matter of controversy requiring the lapse of time to
cast clearer light on the issues involved.”
564. In Van Kuck v Germany (ECtHR) (Application No. 35968/97) decided
on 12 September 2003, the following was said by the ECtHR:
“As the Court has had previous occasion to remark, the concept of
‘private life’ is a broad term not susceptible to exhaustive
definition…….the very essence of the Convention being respect for
human dignity and human freedom, protection is given to the right
of transsexuals to personal development and to physical and moral
security (see I v the United Kingdom para 70 and Christine
Goodwin para 90, both cited above).,,,,,
Furthermore, considering recent developments (see I. v. the United
Kingdom and Christine Goodwin, both cited above, § 62 and § 82,
respectively), gender identity is one of the most intimate areas of a
person’s private life. The burden placed on a person in such a
situation to prove the medical necessity of treatment, including
irreversible surgery, appears therefore disproportionate…..”
565. In Bellinger v Bellinger (Lord Chancellor intervening) [2003] 2 WLR
1174, the House of Lords considered the position of a trans woman who
had lived as a woman, had undergone gender reassignment surgery, and
had after the surgery married a man. It held that the marriage was void as
the plaintiff remained a man in law, but also made a declaration of

4104864/2024 Page 126
incompatibility with the Convention. The court considered the position of a
trans person and the relationship to sex as male or female, as set out more
fully in the Appendix.
566. The Court of Appeal in Croft v Royal Mail [2003] ICR 1425 considered
whether preventing a trans employee from using the toilet which aligned
with their gender identity would constitute direct gender reassignment
discrimination. The facts of that case were given in summary from the
decision that “the applicant began her employment with the Post Office in
March 1987. She was then a man and had been married and fathered
three children. Her work involved driving a mail van to and from the
Leicester sorting office and to and from another centre. The appellant had
for many years had doubts about her sexuality and she sought medical
advice in about August 1997. A medical specialist expressed the opinion
in January 1998 that the applicant had long-standing gender dysphoria
with awareness of female self-identity from an early age and regular cross-
dressing. She was counselled about the difficulties in changing gender
role and because she still wished to proceed was prescribed feminising
hormones. In about April 1998, the applicant started to suggest to friends
and colleagues that she was proposing to change to a female role. On 20
July, there was a meeting attended by the operations manager to discuss
the plans to be implemented. It was recorded that the applicant proposed
to attend work dressed as a woman from 24 August onwards.”
567. It held that there was no absolute right engaged, and as in our view it
assists in resolving some of the issues we face the Tribunal considers that
it is helpful to set out some details of the decision in the Appendix.
568. The Equal Treatment Directive (which was recast as 2000/78/EC) was
held to require Member States within the context of sex discrimination law
to treat trans people not as a “third sex” but rather as men or as women in
accordance with their reassigned gender, by the House of Lords in Chief
Constable of West Yorkshire Police v A [2005] 1 AC 51, (“West
Yorkshire”). That was a case described as being of a male to female
transsexual, which we would refer to as a trans woman, where there had
been both hormone treatment and surgery. Lord Bingham of Cornhill
reviewed the domestic and European authorities and concluded as
follows:
“In my opinion, effect can be given to the clear thrust of Community
law only by reading 'the same sex' in s 54(9) of the 1984 Act, and
'woman', 'man' and 'men' in ss 1, 2, 6 and 7 of the 1975 Act, as
referring to the acquired gender of a post-operative transsexual
who is visually and for all practical purposes indistinguishable from
non-transsexual members of that gender. No one of that gender
searched by such a person could reasonably object to the search.”

4104864/2024 Page 127
569. Baroness Hale of Richmond, as she then was, reviewed authorities from
the European Court of Justice, as it was then called, in relation to the
Directive and stated the following:
“Thus, for the purposes of discrimination between men and women
in the fields covered by the directive, a transperson is to be
regarded as having the sexual identity of the gender to which he or
she has been reassigned.”
570. After considering KB v National Health Service Pensions
Agency Case C-117/01 [2004] IRLR 240, a decision of the Court of
Justice of the European Union (“CJEU”), the following was added:
“If in principle the trans partner of an employee must be recognised
in the reassigned gender for the purpose of death benefits, the
employee herself must in principle be recognised in the reassigned
gender for the purpose of carrying out the duties of the post. This
means that s 54(9) of the 1984 Act must be interpreted as applying
to her in her reassigned gender, unless, as was acknowledged in P
v S, there are strong public policy reasons to the contrary. It is
difficult to argue that such public policy reasons existed in this case
even in 1998.”
571. Practical issues were then addressed including the roles of nurses and
doctors in a hospital ward, commentary that there may be reasonable
objections to treatment by a heterosexual person of the other sex or a
homosexual person of the same sex, with the following then said:
“it would not be rational to object on similar grounds to being nursed
by a transperson of the same sex. In those circumstances it is not
surprising that the employment tribunal held that an objection to
being searched by a transperson would not be reasonable.
Until the matter is resolved by legislation, there will of course be
questions of demarcation and definition. Some of these, for the
reasons explained in Bellinger's case, will be sensitive and difficult.
That is presumably why the Court of Justice in KB's case
acknowledged the role of the national court in deciding whether the
principle did in fact apply in the particular case. One can well
envisage a person who claims to have gender dysphoria but who
has not successfully achieved the transition to the acquired gender.
(One could also envisage a relationship which was not as close to
marriage as the relationship in that case.) The Gender Recognition
Bill provides a definition and a mechanism for resolving these
demarcation questions. But until then it would be for the
employment tribunals to make that judgment in a borderline case.”

4104864/2024 Page 128
572. The case of KB concerned a claimant who was a woman who had worked
for approximately 20 years for the NHS and was a member of its pension
scheme. She had shared an emotional and domestic relationship for a
number of years with R who had been born a woman but identified as male
and who underwent surgical gender reassignment. In light of the law as it
then was it had not been possible to amend R’s birth certificate, and as a
result, and contrary to their wishes, K.B. and R. were not able to
marry. The European Court of Justice applied the jurisprudence from
Goodwin, and held that there had been a breach of Article 141 EC.
573. The Gender Recognition Act 2004 came into force on 1 April 2005. Its
terms are referred to below.
574. In Richards v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions Case C –
423/04 decided on 26 April 2006 there was a reference for a preliminary
ruling concerning the interpretation of Articles 4 and 7 on the progressive
implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in
matters of social security. The claimant was a trans person who had
undergone a gender reassignment operation regarding the refusal to
award the claimant a retirement pension as from the 60th birthday, which
at the time was that applicable for women. The CJEU held that there had
been a breach of the Directive.
575. In Parry v United Kingdom Application no. 42971/05 decided on 28
November 2006 the ECtHR held that an application was manifestly ill
founded. The claimant had to end a marriage in order to obtain a gender
recognition certificate, such that the choice was between gender or
marriage. That there was the right to enter a civil partnership was held to
be within the margin of appreciation for the State such that there had not
been a breach of the Convention. The outcome was therefore the opposite
of that in the previous case and demonstrates the importance of
considering issues that arise under the Convention and those that arise
under the Directive separately.
576. In Grant v United Kingdom 2007/44 ECHR 1 decided on 8 January 2009
the ECtHR considered held that the rights of the claimant had been
breached in the period from the Goodwin decision to the introduction of
the 2004 Act. It held that the 2004 Act had been introduced with laudable
expedition, and that the breach that had existed ended with the Act’s
introduction as legal recognition of the status of the trans gender person
then was provided for.
577. In R(T) v Chief Constable of Greater Manchester Police [2015] AC 49
the Supreme Court considered the nature of the State’s obligation in
relation to Article 8 rights, and said:
“The European court has said repeatedly that, although the
purpose of article 8 is essentially to protect the individual against

4104864/2024 Page 129
arbitrary interference by public authorities, it does not merely
compel the state to abstain from such interference: in addition to
this primarily negative undertaking, there may be positive
obligations inherent in an effective respect for private life. These
obligations may involve the adoption of measures designed to
secure respect for private life even in the sphere of relations
between individuals…..”
578. In Garcon and Nicot v France (ECtHR) (Applications Nos. 79884/12,
52471/13 and 52596/13) decided on 6 April 2017, the following was said,
again by the ECtHR:
“The Court has stressed on numerous occasions that the concept
of “private life” is a broad term not susceptible to exhaustive
definition. It includes not only a person’s physical and psychological
integrity, but can sometimes also embrace aspects of an
individual’s physical and social identity. Elements such as gender
identity or identification, names, sexual orientation and sexual life
fall within the personal sphere protected by Article 8 of the
Convention (see, in particular, Van Kück v. Germany, no.35968/97,
§ 69, ECHR 2003-VII; Schlumpf v. Switzerland, no. 29002/06, § 77,
8 January 2009; and Y.Y. v. Turkey, cited above, § 56, and the
references cited therein).”
579. The Supreme Court considered matters further in R (C) v Secretary of
State for Work and Pensions [2017] UKSC 72, (“Work and Pensions”).
Lady Hale, as she had become, said in the first paragraph of her speech
that:
“….. the way in which the law and officialdom treat people who have
undergone gender reassignment is no trivial matter. It has a serious
impact upon their need, and their right, to live, not as a member of
a ‘third sex’, but as the person they have become, as fully a man or
fully a woman as the case may be.…
A person who has undergone gender reassignment will need the
whole world to recognise and relate to her or to him in the
reassigned gender; and will want to keep to an absolute minimum
any unwanted disclosure of the history. This is not only because
other people can be insensitive and even cruel; the evidence is that
transphobic incidents are increasing and that transgender people
experience high levels of anxiety about this. It is also because of
their deep need to live successfully and peacefully in their
reassigned gender, something which non-transgender people can
take for granted.”
580. In MB v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions Case C – 46/16
decided on 26 June 2018 the outcome was similar to that in Richards in

4104864/2024 Page 130
circumstances where a person had been assigned male at birth, had later
married, had then commenced to transition to female, which had included
surgery, but had not sought a gender reassignment certificate because
that would have required to end the marriage which the claimant and the
claimant’s wife did not wish to do for religious reasons.
581. In R (FDJ) v Secretary of State for Justice [2021] 1 WLR 5265 the High
Court dismissed an application for judicial review brought by a trans
woman prisoner regarding the care and management of such prisoners. It
commented on the lack of reliable evidence as to whether trans women
prisoners were a greater risk than biological women prisoners, and that
the statistical evidence before the court was unsatisfactory. After
considering the evidence the court stated
“I can accept, at any rate for present purposes, that the
unconditional introduction of a transgender woman into the general
population of a women’s prison carries a statistically greater risk of
sexual assault upon non-transgender prisoners than would be the
case if a non-transgender woman were introduced. But that
statistical conclusion takes no account of the risk assessment
which the policies require.
I fully understand the concerns advanced on behalf of the claimant.
Many people may think it incongruous and inappropriate that a
prisoner of masculine physique and male genitalia should be
accommodated in a female prison in any circumstances. More
importantly…….I also readily accept the proposition (for which Ms
Hogarth provides evidence) that some, and perhaps many, women
prisoners may suffer fear and acute anxiety if required to share
prison accommodation and facilities with a transgender woman
who has male genitalia, that their fear and anxiety may be
increased if that transgender woman has been convicted of sexual
or violent offences against women….
However the subjective concerns of women prisoners are not the
only concerns which the defendant had to consider in developing
the policies: he also had to take account of the rights of transgender
women in the prison system.”
582. The Supreme Court addressed the meaning of “woman” in the 2010 Act
in FWS and summarised its conclusion as follows:
“The definition of sex in the EA 2010 makes clear that the concept
of sex is binary, a person is either a woman or a man. Persons who
share that protected characteristic for the purposes of the group-
based rights and protections are persons of the same sex and
provisions that refer to protection for women necessarily exclude
men. Although the word “biological” does not appear in this

4104864/2024 Page 131
definition, the ordinary meaning of those plain and unambiguous
words corresponds with the biological characteristics that make an
individual a man or a woman. These are assumed to be self-
explanatory and to require no further explanation. Men and women
are on the face of the definition only differentiated as a grouping by
the biology they share with their group.”
583. The court also noted that gender reassignment is defined distinctly from
sex, stating:
“Accordingly, the EA 2010 recognises sex and gender
reassignment as distinct and separate bases for discrimination and
inequality, giving separate protection to each…….it is the attribute
of proposing to undergo, undergoing or having undergone a
process (or part of a process) for the purpose of reassignment,
which is the common factor [for those under section 7] not the sex
into which the person is reassigned.”
584. After commenting that a Gender Recognition Certificate (GRC) is
confidential to the person with the characteristic if held, the court added:
“Moreover, in either case [with or without a GRC] the individual’s
biological sex may continue to be readily perceivable and may form
the basis of unlawful discrimination.”
585. It then referred to the fact that the difficulty a certificated sex interpretation
“would create for service-providers, employers and other organisations in
applying equality law to these groups is obvious.” It concluded that under
the Act certificated sex was not relevant to the definition of woman or man,
and that the definition was biological sex from that assigned at birth.
586. In TH v Czech Republic (Application no. 33037/22) decided on 12 June
2025 the European Court of Human Rights noted that “trans-related and
gender diverse identities are not conditions of mental ill-health [in the
International Classification of Diseases]. Therefore, “transsexualism” has
been replaced with “gender incongruence of adolescence and adulthood”,
which now appears in a new chapter “Conditions related to sexual health”
and is characterised by a marked and persistent incongruence between
an individual’s experienced gender and the assigned sex, which often
leads to a desire to “transition”, in order to live and be accepted as a
person of the experienced gender. This may involve hormonal treatment,
surgery or other healthcare services to align the individual’s body, as much
as desired and to the extent possible, with the experienced gender.”
587. It also referred to the change in terminology for the condition. There had
been a reference in Goodwin to a previous version of the International
Classification of Diseases (ICD) and to what Lord Nicholls had described
as follows:

4104864/2024 Page 132
“Transsexual people are born with the anatomy of a person of one
sex but with an unshakeable belief or feeling that they are persons
of the opposite sex. ……The aetiology of this condition remains
uncertain. It is now generally recognized as a psychiatric disorder.”
588. The changes in terminology led to the replacement of transsexualism with
“gender incongruence of adolescence and adulthood” in the International
Classification of Diseases version issued in 2024, such that it is not now
regarded as a psychiatric disorder.
Manifestation of religion or belief
589. In Eweida and others v United Kingdom [2013] ECHR 37 the ECtHR
stated that to count as a manifestation within Article 9 ECHR, there must
be a sufficiently close and direct nexus between the act and the underlying
belief. It had the result that in a direct discrimination case an employer will
not be found to have discriminated if the reason for its actions was not the
belief but the manner in which it was manifested by the employee, where
objection could justifiably be taken to that manner. That introduces what
is in essence a test that includes proportionality, and a distinction between
the belief and its manifestation which has been described as separability.
590. The broad approach to such issues of proportionality in cases involving
ECHR rights is set out in Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (No 2) [2014] AC
700, where four questions were identified by the Supreme Court:
a. Is the objective of the measure sufficiently important to justify the
limitation of a protected right?
b. Is the measure rationally connected to the objective?
c. Could a less intrusive measure have been used without unacceptably
compromising the achievement of the objective?
d. Whether, balancing the severity of the measure's effects on the rights
of the persons to whom it applies against the importance of the
objective, to the extent that the measure will contribute to its
achievement, the former outweighs the latter.
591. In Page v NHS Trust Development Authority [2021] EWCA Civ 255 the
Court of Appeal said the following:
“In a direct discrimination claim the essential question is whether
the act complained of was done because of the protected
characteristic, or, to put the same thing another way, whether the
protected characteristic was the reason for it: see para. 29 above.
It is thus necessary in every case properly to characterise the
putative discriminator’s reason for acting. In the context of the
protected characteristic of religion or belief the EAT case-law has
recognised a distinction between (1) the case where the reason is

4104864/2024 Page 133
the fact that the claimant holds and/or manifests the protected
belief, and (2) the case where the reason is that the claimant had
manifested that belief in some particular way to which objection
could justifiably be taken. In the latter case it is the objectionable
manifestation of the belief, and not the belief itself, which is treated
as the reason for the act complained of. Of course, if the
consequences are not such as to justify the act complained of, they
cannot sensibly be treated as separate from an objection to the
belief itself. The distinction is apparent from three decisions in
cases where an employee was disciplined for inappropriate
Christian proselytization at work – Chondol v Liverpool City Council
[2009] UKEAT 0298/08, Grace v Places for Children [2013] UKEAT
0217/13 and Wasteney v East London NHS Foundation Trust
[2016] UKEAT 0157/15, [2016] ICR 643. In essence, the reasoning
in all three cases is that the reason why the employer disciplined
the claimant was not that they held or expressed their Christian
beliefs but that they had manifested them inappropriately.”
592. In Higgs v Farmor’s School [2025] IRLR 368 the Court of Appeal
considered a claim of direct discrimination and harassment in the context
of an employee expressing gender critical beliefs. As it is in our view
another case of assistance in determining the issues before the Tribunal
it will also be quoted from at length in the Appendix. The Supreme Court
refused leave to appeal on 4 June 2025. The Court of Appeal noted the
importance of the principle of free speech, as we address further below.
593. After analysing Page, including the distinction referred to therein between
the absolute right to hold a belief and the qualified right to manifest it, the
court said the following:
“In summary, Page was decided on the basis that adverse
treatment in response to an employee’s manifestation of their belief
was not to be treated as having occurred “because of” that
manifestation if it constituted an objectively justifiable response to
something “objectionable” in the way in which the belief was
manifested: it thus introduced a requirement of objective
justification into the causation element in section 13 (1). Further,
we held that the test of objective justification was not substantially
different from that required under article 9.2 (and also article 10.2)
of the Convention. I should clarify two points about language:
(1) The word “objectionable” in para. 74 is evidently a (possibly
rather inapt) shorthand for the phrase in para. 68 “to which
objection could justifiably be taken”. Both have the same effect as
the word “inappropriate” which is also used.

4104864/2024 Page 134
(2) The “way” in which the belief is manifested is a deliberately
broad phrase intended to cover also the circumstances in which the
manifestation occurs.”
594. It then made five further points in relation to that authority. It also
considered the guidance issued by the EAT in the case before it, and
generally endorsed that guidance but with the following qualifying
comments:
“provided para. 94 is read as being limited to, as she says, a
summary of the underlying principles, I would respectfully endorse
it. I would only say, consistently with the caution already expressed,
that it will not be necessary – or always even useful – for a tribunal
to structure its reasoning by reference to the nine “considerations”
enumerated in head (v). All of them are potentially relevant; but in
practice, as the EHRC observed, the focus of the issues in any
given case will only be on some of them, and there may be some
cases where other considerations – or considerations which do not
neatly fit into her formulation – may be relevant.”
595. Paragraph 94 of the EAT decision, reported at Higgs v Farmor’s School
[2023] EAT 89, stated the following:
“All that said, I can see that, within the employment context, it may
be helpful for there to be at least be some mutual understanding of
the basic principles that will underpin the approach adopted when
assessing the proportionality of any interference with rights to
freedom of religion and belief and of freedom of expression.
(1) First, the foundational nature of the rights must be recognised:
the freedom to manifest belief (religious or otherwise) and to
express views relating to that belief are essential rights in any
democracy, whether or not the belief in question is popular or
mainstream and even if its expression may offend.
(2) Second, those rights are, however, qualified. The manifestation
of belief, and free expression, will be protected but not where the
law permits the limitation or restriction of such manifestation or
expression to the extent necessary for the protection of the rights
and freedoms of others. Where such limitation or restriction is
objectively justified given the manner of the manifestation or
expression, that is not, properly understood, action taken because
of, or relating to, the exercise of the rights in question but is by
reason of the objectionable manner of the manifestation or
expression.
(3) Whether a limitation or restriction is objectively justified will
always be context-specific. The fact that the issue arises within a

4104864/2024 Page 135
relationship of employment will be relevant, but different
considerations will inevitably arise, depending on the nature of that
employment.
(4) It will always be necessary to ask (per Bank Mellat): (i) whether
the objective the employer seeks to achieve is sufficiently important
to justify the limitation of the right in question; (ii) whether the
limitation is rationally connected to that objective; (iii) whether a less
intrusive limitation might be imposed without undermining the
achievement of the objective in question; and (iv) whether,
balancing the severity of the limitation on the rights of the worker
concerned against the importance of the objective, the former
outweighs the latter.
(5) In answering those questions, within the context of a
relationship of employment, the considerations identified by [the
Archbishops’ Council] are likely to be relevant, such that regard
should be had to: (i) the content of the manifestation; (ii) the tone
used; (iii) the extent of the manifestation; (iv) the worker’s
understanding of the likely audience; (v) the extent and nature of
the intrusion on the rights of others, and any consequential impact
on the employer’s ability to run its business; (vi) whether the worker
has made clear that the views expressed are personal, or whether
they might be seen as representing the views of the employer, and
whether that might present a reputational risk; (vii) whether there is
a potential power imbalance given the nature of the worker’s
position or role and that of those whose rights are intruded upon;
(viii) the nature of the employer’s business, in particular where there
is a potential impact on vulnerable service users or clients; (ix)
whether the limitation imposed is the least intrusive measure open
to the employer.”
596. The Court of Appeal further held that where allegations had been made it
was permissible to investigate them, and to consider suspension, although
it commented on the decision to make in that regard as follows:
“The disciplinary process claim
I can give my reasons on this point shortly. I have no doubt that the
School was entitled to carry out an investigation of some kind in
response to the complaint. The posts unquestionably used
offensive language, even if it was evidently not the Claimant’s own,
and they had been seen by, and caused concern to, at least one
parent who knew that she worked at the School. It would frankly
have been irresponsible not to try to ascertain whether there was a
risk of serious reputational damage or of the Claimant “bringing into
school” the issues that she raised in the posts or holding attitudes
that might affect how she treated gay or trans children. It is

4104864/2024 Page 136
debatable whether that investigation needed to be disciplinary in
character or, if it did, whether Ms Dorey was justified in finding a
case to answer at the end of it. It is still more debatable whether it
was necessary to suspend the Claimant: as to this, see the
observations of Elias LJ in Crawford v Suffolk Mental Health
Partnership NHS Trust [2012] EWCA Civ 138, [2012] IRLR 402, at
para. 71. However, these are not questions to which I believe that
this Court can provide a confident answer in circumstances where
they were not explored by the ET or in the submissions to us.”
597. The limitations on free speech included the following reference to the
submission for the respondent
“Mr Jones asked us to note in particular that the Court
in Lilliendahl found that the language used by the applicant,
coupled with the clear expression of disgust, was such as "to
promote intolerance and detestation of homosexual persons". He
relied on the case as authority for the proposition that article 10
rights, and thus also rights under article 9, did not extend
unqualified protection to "insulting, holding up to ridicule or
slandering specific groups of the population": whether speech of
that kind was protected would depend on "the content of the
expression and the manner of its delivery". I have no difficulty with
that proposition, which is consistent with the approach endorsed in
Page.”
598. Further comments were made about whether a person might be
transphobic from views expressed, and there was a comment on the
importance of focussing on the words spoken as follows:
“we are concerned only with whether the School's response to the
posts was objectively justified. But it is just as necessary in that
context to judge an employee's statement by what they actually say
(albeit including any necessary implications) rather than by what
some readers might choose illegitimately to read into them. That is
particularly important in the current social media climate, where
messages are often read hastily and sometimes by people who are
partisan or even ill-intentioned or (more likely) simply succumb to
the common human tendency to find in a communication what they
expect to find rather than what is actually there.”
599. The court distinguished the facts of the case before it, which essentially
involved passing on messages on Facebook to others, with language the
employee did not endorse, from those in Lilliendahl v Iceland 29297/18
[2020] ECHR 93. In that case a person had made comments in relation to
homosexuality using terms of sexual deviance, referred to further below.
The Supreme Court in Iceland held that that was a crime, and the ECtHR

4104864/2024 Page 137
upheld that decision. The ECtHR’s reasons are set out where relevant to
this case in the Appendix.
600. The Code of Practice: Employment includes the following:
“Manifestation of religion or belief
2.60 While people have an absolute right to hold a particular
religion or belief under Article 9 of the European Convention on
Human Rights, manifestation of that religion or belief is a qualified
right which may in certain circumstances be limited. For example,
it may need to be balanced against other Convention rights such
as the right to respect for private and family life (Article 8) or the
right to freedom of expression (Article 10).
2.61 Manifestations of a religion or belief could include treating
certain days as days for worship or rest; following a certain dress
code; following a particular diet; or carrying out or avoiding certain
practices. There is not always a clear line between holding a
religion or belief and the manifestation of that religion or belief.
Placing limitations on a person’s right to manifest their religion or
belief may amount to unlawful discrimination; this would usually
amount to indirect discrimination.
Example: An employer has a ‘no headwear’ policy for its staff.
Unless this policy can be objectively justified, this will be indirect
discrimination against Sikh men who wear the turban, Muslim
women who wear a headscarf and observant Jewish men who wear
a skullcap as manifestations of their religion.”
Equality and Human Rights Commission Codes and Guidance
601. Codes of Practice issued under section 14 of the Equality Act 2006 are to
be taken into account by Tribunals in the circumstances set out in section
15(4) of that Act, which states as follows:
“15 Codes of practice: supplemental
…..
(4) A failure to comply with a provision of a code shall not of itself
make a person liable to criminal or civil proceedings; but a code—
(a) shall be admissible in evidence in criminal or civil
proceedings, and
(b) shall be taken into account by a court or tribunal in any case
in which it appears to the court or tribunal to be relevant.
(5) Subsection (4)(b) does not apply in relation to a code issued
under section 14(4).”
602. There are three separate Codes issued by the Equality and Human Rights
Commission (“EHRC”) which were brought into effect by The Equality Act

4104864/2024 Page 138
2010 Codes of Practice (Services, Public Functions and Associations,
Employment, and Equal Pay) Order 2011.
603. A statutory Code of Practice is taken into account where that is required
by the statute, and may be considered more generally if a non-statutory
document, but each is a form of guidance and is not a statute. The basic
principle was addressed by the House of Lords in SCA Packaging v
Boyle [2009] ICR 1056, That case concerned the definition of disability in
a Northern Ireland case, on which there was departmental guidance
issued, and Lord Rodger of Earlsferry said that “while the Guidance can
helpfully illustrate the way that a provision may work in practice, it cannot
be regarded as an authority on a point of statutory interpretation.”
604. Statutory construction is a matter for the courts and tribunals. If the
Tribunal considers that a Code or Guidance is a mis-statement or mis-
application of what Parliament has enacted, it can and should disregard it.
605. The Code of Practice: Employment issued by the EHRS in 2011 is one
such Code, and is relevant to issues of work under Part 5 of the Act. It is
referred to as appropriate above and below.
606. Its provisions as to exclusions from the terms of Schedules 22 and 23 of
the Act are mainly found in Chapter 13 which includes the following:
“Provision of services to the public
13.46 The Act says that an employer who provides services to the
public is not liable for claims of discrimination or victimisation by an
employee under Part 5 of the Act (the employment provisions) in
relation to those services. Where a worker is discriminated against
or victimised in relation to those services, their claim would be in
the county court (or sheriff court in Scotland) under Part 3 of the
Act relating to services and public functions.
Example: If an employee of a women’s clothing retailer is denied
the services of the retailer because she is a transsexual woman,
her claim would be made under the services provisions of the Act.
This means she should bring her claim in the county court.
13.47 However, where the service provided under the terms and
conditions of employment differs from that provided to other
employees, or is related to training, the worker can bring a claim in
the Employment Tribunal under the employment provisions (Part
5).
Example: In the example above, the situation would be different if
the same transsexual woman’s employment contract provided her
with a 20% discount on all clothes purchased from her employer, a
discount not available to members of the public. If she tried to use

4104864/2024 Page 139
the discount and was refused, then she would bring her claim in the
Employment Tribunal under the employment provisions of the
Act………
“Communal accommodation
13.57. An employer does not breach the prohibition of sex
discrimination or gender reassignment discrimination by doing
anything in relation to admitting persons to communal
accommodation or to providing any benefit, facility or service linked
to the accommodation, if the criteria set out below are satisfied.
Sch. 23, para 3
13.58. Communal accommodation is residential accommodation
which includes dormitories or other shared sleeping
accommodation which, for reasons of privacy, should be used only
by persons of the same sex. It can also include shared sleeping
accommodation for men and for women, ordinary sleeping
accommodation and residential accommodation, all or part of which
should be used only by persons of the same sex because of the
nature of the sanitary facilities serving the accommodation.
13.59. A benefit, facility or service is linked to communal
accommodation if it cannot properly and effectively be provided
except for those using the accommodation. It can be refused only
if the person can lawfully be refused use of the accommodation.
13.60. Where accommodation or a benefit, facility or service is
refused to a worker, alternative arrangements must be made in
each case where reasonable so as to compensate the person
concerned.
Example: At a worksite, the only sleeping accommodation provided
is communal accommodation occupied by men. A female worker
wishes to attend a training course at the worksite but is refused
permission because of the men-only accommodation. Her
employer must make alternative arrangements to compensate her
where reasonable; for example, by arranging alternative
accommodation near the worksite or an alternative course.
13.61. Sex or gender reassignment discrimination in admitting
people to communal accommodation is not permitted unless the
accommodation is managed in a way which is as fair as possible to
both women and men.
13.62. In excluding a person because of sex or gender
reassignment, the employer must take account of:

4104864/2024 Page 140
• whether and how far it is reasonable to expect that the
accommodation should be altered or extended or that further
accommodation should be provided; and
• the relative frequency of demand or need for the
accommodation by persons of each sex.
13.63. The Act permits a provider of communal accommodation to
exclude people who are proposing to undergo, undergoing or who
have undergoing gender reassignment from this accommodation.
However, to do so will only be lawful where the exclusion is a
proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. This must be
considered on a case-by-case basis; in each case, the provider of
communal accommodation must assess whether it is appropriate
and necessary to exclude the transsexual person.”
607. The EHRC has also issued the Code of Practice: Services again under
section 14 of the 2006 Act. It did so under Part 3 of the 2010 Act, as it
made clear at paragraph 1.6. It included the following wording:
“Gender reassignment discrimination and separate and single-
sex services
13.57 If a service provider provides single- or separate-sex services
for women and men, or provides services differently to women and
men, they should treat transsexual people according to the gender
role in which they present. However, the Act does permit the
service provider to provide a different service or exclude a person
from the service who is proposing to undergo, is undergoing or who
has undergone gender reassignment. This will only be lawful where
the exclusion is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate
[aim].
Schedule 3 para 28.
13.58 The intention is to ensure that the transsexual person is
treated in a way that best meets their needs. Service providers
need to be aware that transsexual people may need access to
services relating to their birth sex which are otherwise provided only
to people of that sex. For example, a transsexual man may need
access to breast screening or gynaecological services. In order to
protect the privacy of all users, it is recommended that the service
provider should discuss with any transsexual service users the best
way to enable them to have access to the service.
Example:
A clothes shop has separate changing areas for male and female
customers to try on garments in cubicles. The shop concludes that
it would not be appropriate or necessary to exclude a transsexual

4104864/2024 Page 141
woman from the female changing room as privacy and decency of
all users can be assured by the provision of separate cubicles.
13.59 Service providers should be aware that where a transsexual
person is visually and for all practical purposes indistinguishable
from a non-transsexual person of that gender, they should normally
be treated according to their acquired gender, unless there are
strong reasons to the contrary.
13.60 As stated at the beginning of this chapter, any exception to
the prohibition of discrimination must be applied as restrictively as
possible and the denial of a service to a transsexual person should
only occur in exceptional circumstances. A service provider can
have a policy on provision of the service to transsexual users but
should apply this policy on a case-by-case basis in order to
determine whether the exclusion of a transsexual person is
proportionate in the individual circumstances. Service providers will
need to balance the need of the transsexual person for the service
and the detriment to them if they are denied access, against the
needs of other service users and any detriment that may affect
them if the transsexual person has access to the service. To do this
will often require discussion with service users (maintaining
confidentiality for the transsexual service user). Care should be
taken in each case to avoid a decision based on ignorance or
prejudice. Also, the provider will need to show that a less
discriminatory way to achieve the objective was not available.”
608. The EHRC has also issued guidance. It does not have the status of a Code
of Practice and the Tribunal is not bound to take it into account under
section 15 of the 2006 Act. Following the Supreme Court decision in FWS
the EHRC issued what it termed interim guidance on 25 April 2025, which
included the following:
“In relation to workplaces, requirements are set out in the
Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992. These
require suitable and sufficient facilities to be provided including
toilets and sometimes changing facilities and showers. Toilets,
showers and changing facilities may be mixed-sex where they are
in a separate room lockable from the inside. Where changing
facilities are required under the regulations, and where it is
necessary for reasons of propriety, there must be separate facilities
for men and women or separate use of those facilities such as
separate lockable rooms.
It is not compulsory for services that are open to the public to be
provided on a single-sex basis or to have single-sex facilities such
as toilets. These can be single-sex if it is a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim and they meet other conditions in the

4104864/2024 Page 142
Act. However, it could be indirect sex discrimination against women
if the only provision is mixed-sex.
In workplaces and services that are open to the public where
separate single-sex facilities are lawfully provided:
• trans women (biological men) should not be permitted to use
the women’s facilities and trans men (biological women) should
not be permitted to use the men’s facilities, as this will mean that
they are no longer single-sex facilities and must be open to all
users of the opposite sex
• in some circumstances the law also allows trans women
(biological men) not to be permitted to use the men’s facilities,
and trans men (biological woman) not to be permitted to use the
women’s facilities
• however where facilities are available to both men and women,
trans people should not be put in a position where there are no
facilities for them to use
• where possible, mixed-sex toilet, washing or changing facilities
in addition to sufficient single-sex facilities should be
provided……..”
609. That interim guidance was later amended to an extent, including that
“Toilets, showers and changing facilities may be mixed-sex where they
are in a separate room lockable from the inside.”.
Liability of employee
610. The liability of an employer in relation to discrimination and victimisation is
regulated principally by the terms of section 39 of the Act. There is a
separate provision as to liability of the employer for harassment found in
section 40. Sex discrimination arises either under section 13 or section 19
as provided for by section 25(8), such that the concepts of harassment
and victimisation under sections 26 and 27 are not matters of
discrimination. The vicarious liability of the employer for acts of an
employee in the course of employment is provided for in section 109.
There is a potential defence available to an employer against its liability in
section 109(4) which the first respondent does not seek to rely on.
611. Individual liability of an employee is addressed in sections 110 – 112.
Baldwin v Cleves School and others [2024] IRLR 637 considered the
terms of section 110 and held that there was no discretion on a Tribunal
as to whether to make a finding of personal liability where the conditions
under that section in relation to vicarious liability of the employer from the
acts of the employee were met.

4104864/2024 Page 143
612. The act of making a request may not by itself suffice to confer personal
liability, discussed in Nagarajan v Agnew [1995] ICR 520, although that
was in the context of the other employee to whom the request was made
not being employed by the same employer.
613. In NHS Trust Development Authority v Saiger [2018] ICR 297 the EAT
held that for there to be liability under section 111 there must be evidence
of actual instruction, causation or inducement or attempt to cause or
induce; and the conclusion that someone was in a position to do those
things, was a party to a discussion, or played a material part in a decision,
was not enough.
614. The liability of a third party was considered in Bailey v Stonewall Equality
Ltd and another [2024] EAT 119, a case in which argument has been
heard in the Court of Appeal on 21 and 22 October 2025 but in which, as
at the date of the Judgment being issued, no decision has been published.
The EAT held in that case that the claim for liability of a third party had not
been established, and reviewed the law in relation to the same.
615. The terms of sections 111 and 112 were considered by the EAT in
Akester and others v Burlington Care (Yorkshire) Ltd and others
[2025] EAT 111. The appeal was against a decision of the tribunal to strike
out claims by well over 100 claimants against their employers which were
also directed to the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care and the
Department of Health and Social Care in relation to Guidance issued as
to regulations made for care homes during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Employees who were considered not to have either been vaccinated or
had a clinical reason not to do so were dismissed. The Guidance was held
not to be a basis on which there could be liability under either of those
sections, and the appeal was dismissed. The law in relation to those
provisions was summarised. The decision also considered the terms of
Schedule 22 in the context of Part 5 of the Act.
616. In Miles v Gilbank and another [2006] ICR 1297 the Court of Appeal
held that, in order to ‘aid’ an act of discrimination under the predecessor
provision to the 2010 Act, now in section 112, a person must do more
than merely create an environment in which discrimination can occur, but
that the manager had done so and was liable as an individual accordingly.
The Gender Recognition Act 2004
617. The Gender Recognition Act 2004 (“the 2004 Act”) was passed following
Goodwin and Bellinger – see the Supreme Court decision in FWS at
paragraph 69. The main provisions of the 2004 Act relevant for this case
(a) provided for applications to be made for a Gender Recognition
Certificate (“GRC”) and for the criteria to be applied and the evidence to
be provided to obtain such a certificate: (b) established a Gender
Recognition Panel (“the Panel”) to determine those applications. Section

4104864/2024 Page 144
1 provides that a person aged 18 or over can apply for a GRC on the basis
of “living in the other gender” or Section 2 provides that the Panel must
grant the application if satisfied that the applicant satisfies four criteria,
namely that the applicant: (i) has or has had gender dysphoria, (ii) has
lived in the acquired gender throughout the period of two years ending
with the date on which the application is made, (iii) intends to continue to
live in the acquired gender until death, and (iv) complies with the evidential
requirements imposed by and under section 3. The evidence required
under section 3 includes two medical reports, one of which must be by a
registered medical practitioner or chartered psychologist practising in the
field of gender dysphoria, and that report must include “details of the
diagnosis of the applicant’s gender dysphoria”. Further, if the applicant
has undergone or is undergoing or plans to undergo treatment to modify
sexual characteristics, one of the reports must include details of that
treatment. The applicant must also provide a statutory declaration that the
applicant has lived in the acquired gender for two years and intends to do
so until death.
The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992
618. The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992 (“the 1992
Regulations”) were made under the Health and Safety at Work etc Act
1974, which implemented most of the provisions of European Council
Directive 89/654/EEC concerning the minimum safety and health
requirements for the workplace. Regulations 20 and 24 provide:
“Sanitary Conveniences
20.--(1) Suitable and sufficient sanitary conveniences shall be
provided at readily accessible places.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1), sanitary
conveniences shall not be suitable unless……
(c) Separate rooms containing conveniences are provided for
men and women except where and so far as each
convenience is in a separate room the door of which is
capable of being secured from the inside…..
Facilities for changing clothing
24.—(1) Suitable and sufficient facilities shall be provided for any
person at work in the workplace to change clothing in all cases
where—
(a) the person has to wear special clothing for the purpose of
work; and

4104864/2024 Page 145
(b) the person can not, for reasons of health or propriety, be
expected to change in another room.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1), the facilities
mentioned in that paragraph shall not be suitable unless they
include separate facilities for, or separate use of facilities by, men
and women where necessary for reasons of propriety and the
facilities are easily accessible, of sufficient capacity and provided
with seating.”
Evidence, judicial knowledge and related matters
619. Facts can held established by the Tribunal from four sources - (i)
admissions in pleadings (ii) a Statement of Agreed Facts (iii) oral evidence
including by reference to documentation before the Tribunal and (iv)
judicial knowledge.
620. Oral evidence is generally of matters of fact within the knowledge of the
witness, and that is addressed in a Practice Direction on use of written
witness statements for example, but can be in the form of skilled (expert)
evidence either of fact or of matters of opinion, as addressed below.
621. Proof of the provenance of each document in an Employment Tribunal is
not required: Carabott v London Borough of Newham [2025] EAT 155
referring to Hovis Ltd v Louton EAT 1023/20. Documents can be put to
a party in evidence without leading the authors of them, for example. In
our view however, and for the avoidance of doubt, if the document is
relevant, and not one agreed between the parties, if it is not put to one of
the witnesses at the hearing at the least it is not entered into the evidence,
and if it is not put to the party against whom or which it is said to be relevant
it is likely not to be fair or just under the overriding objective to place weight
on it. We address the issue of how evidence is presented further below.
622. Rule 41(3) of the Rules states that “The Tribunal is not bound by any rule
of law relating to the admissibility of evidence in proceedings before the
courts” which means that opinion evidence or evidence from someone not
skilled is admissible before the Tribunal, although may not be before a civil
court as discussed below, but that is subject to the overriding objective in
Rule 3 as to dealing with cases fairly and justly. In Snowball v Gardner
Merchant Ltd [1987] ICR 719 the EAT stated that:
''In spite of the wide discretion which Parliament has entrusted to
an [employment] tribunal, it must not, however, be exercised in a
capricious fashion. In particular, a tribunal must not ignore nor
totally disregard the well-established principles of law with
reference to the admissibility of evidence.''

4104864/2024 Page 146
623. In Aberdeen Steak Houses Group plc v Ibrahim [1988] IRLR 420 the
EAT made similar comments extending to issues of procedure as well as
those of evidence, stating that:
'' … whilst recognising that tribunals have a wide discretion in these
matters of procedure and evidence, it must be remembered that the
rules of procedure and evidence have been built up over many
years in order to guide courts and tribunals in the fairest and
simplest way of dealing with and deciding issues. … Total
informality and absence of generally recognised rules of procedure
and evidence can be counter-productive in that parties may not feel
that their cases have been fairly and appropriately dealt with.''
624. These cases both pre-date the 2024 and indeed the 2013 Rules, and the
version of the overriding objective in force in them is slightly different, but
the principle is we consider still applicable when assessing evidence that
is led.
625. In Connor v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police [2024]
EAT 175 it was held that skilled or expert evidence may not always
be required, with that case being one that included disability
discrimination under section 15 where the issues included what the
condition of depression had caused:
“Preparation of expert medical reports is an expensive
exercise and one which in the more informal forum of the
employment tribunal should only be required when clearly
necessary. Where there is existing medical evidence due
regard should be paid to that evidence. There was nothing
other than the purpose for which the report was prepared,
which the ET relied upon to undermine the diagnosis and
conclusions. In my judgment where a report is prepared by a
qualified person, which deals with issues that a tribunal are
required to resolve, due regard ought to be paid to the
conclusions. An employment tribunal is not bound to accept
the conclusions of a medical expert but rejection requires
substantive reasoning, not simply reference to the purpose for
which a report was prepared.”
626. The Supreme Court has addressed the requirements of skilled evidence
in Kennedy, a case also referred to further below.
627. There is a wide variety of matters of fact and law within judicial knowledge
which do not require evidence, and in court evidence on which would be
inadmissible – Ross v Ross 1930 SC (HL) 1. They include matters of
scientific fact that are not disputed, or so obvious that there is no serious
dispute about them – addressed for example in Ballard v North British
Rly Co 1923 SC (HL) 43. In Walker and Walker on Evidence at 11.6 the

4104864/2024 Page 147
facts are said to include those “which are so notorious as to be
indisputable”. In the context of the criminal law the issue was addressed
in di Pinto v PF, Glasgow [2024] HCJAC 7, where that textbook was
referred to and the position summarised as “Facts within judicial
knowledge were those that could be immediately ascertained from
sources of indisputable accuracy or which were so notorious as to be
indisputable.”
628. Where the attributes of a particular person are in dispute, evidence is
required - Kennedy v Smith 1975 SC 266. The broadly equivalent
concept is known as judicial notice in England and Wales, and was for
example applied in employment tribunal proceedings in relation to the fact
that women tend to undertake a greater burden in relation to child care
than men in Dobson v North Cumbria Integrated Care NHS
Foundation Trust UKEAT/0195/20. The Tribunal may also draw on its
ordinary practical knowledge and experience – Barke v SEETEC
Business Technology Centre Ltd EAT 0917/04. In McCafferty v Royal
Mail Group Ltd EATS 0002/12 the EAT stated that the lay members were
entitled to draw on their valuable common sense and knowledge of what
any employee would be expected to know.
Observations on the evidence
Claimant’s witnesses
629. The claimant gave evidence that in some particular respects we did not
consider to be credible. The first aspect of that was her evidence that she
did not use the toilet cubicle to change for reasons of hygiene. That was
contradicted by evidence from Ms Davidson and Ms Wishart who stated
that she regularly did so. Ms Davidson’s comment to Ms Glancey in the
interview held in the investigation was that her past experience was that
the claimant changed in the toilet, although she added that she [Ms
Davidson] did not use that changing room on a day-to-day basis. At that
stage Ms Davidson would not have known what the claimant’s position on
this would be or that it would be an issue, in our view. Ms Wishart was
very clear in her evidence and we considered entirely credible. We
accepted their evidence, and considered that on such an issue the
claimant not being accurate about it was an issue of credibility not
reliability. We also noted that the claimant referred in her evidence in chief
to an intention to go to “the toilet” in order to change her clothing
immediately prior to the incident on Christmas Eve, without stating that
that was an exceptional circumstance for her, which we consider is
indicative of a lack of credibility on this point.

4104864/2024 Page 148
630. The second aspect was her evidence that when referring to “the prisons
incident” during the Christmas Eve incident she was not aware that that
involved a rapist, as a broad summary of her evidence. That we
considered to be not credible. There was an admitted fact that “C referred
to the “women’s prison incident”, that is the Isla Bryson/Adam Graham
case.” It is taken from the claimant’s pleadings, at paragraph 13 of the
Response Table which the admitted fact cross references. In light of the
circumstances of that case, which involved a person who as a man raped
two women, who then commenced to transition to female including the
change of name, and where an issue arose when initially placed in a
women’s prison, which is a matter of particular concern, and of interest, to
those with gender critical beliefs such as the claimant, that evidence
seeking to distance herself from the remark which related to a rapist was
we considered not credible.
631. The third aspect was her evidence given when recalled in relation to a
message she had passed on to her group of friends which related to floods
in Pakistan in the most highly offensive terms. She initially described the
messages as “dark humour”. Her evidence later was that the message
had been sent to provoke a reaction, in broad summary. We did not
consider that latter evidence to be credible given the content of the
message sent and her initial evidence about it. In our view it was an
untruthful attempt to downplay what she had done, which she recognised
as having included very offensive material. We consider that it was clear
beyond serious argument that the author or authors of the original
message considered the remarks humorous, and that the claimant had
also considered them humorous which was why she had passed them on.
That was supported in our view by her reference to dark humour.
632. A wider aspect of evidence we considered concerned an attack on her
position in cross examination to the effect that she was generally trans-
phobic, which she denied both when giving evidence initially and on recall
(which is addressed further below). Some of the messages she sent are
indicative of views which could be described as trans-phobic. In one dated
10 January 2024 the claimant described the second respondent as “it”. In
an earlier part of the same message there is reference to the second
respondent having a shadow (being in our view a reference to the
appearance of stubble on the face) and a “pathetic voice”. These are
disparaging remarks in relation to the second respondent in our view,
because of the second respondent being a trans woman.
633. In another the second respondent is described as a “weirdo”, which the
claimant sought to explain as someone acting weirdly, but which we did
not accept as being what she had intended by use of that word. These
remarks we consider to be consistent with other evidence of her making
comments the second respondent was liable to find offensive that went

4104864/2024 Page 149
beyond the simple expression of a gender critical belief, but amounted to
personal attacks on the second respondent.
634. During the Christmas Eve incident she referred to the second respondent
undergoing some form of process, which we consider was indicative of a
dismissive attitude towards gender reassignment as a protected
characteristic. The view we formed from the evidence was that the
claimant does not consider that a trans person is anything other than a
male whatever the views of the second respondent.
635. These matters collectively could be described as transphobic, but
transphobic is not a term of law, it is very generic, and there was other
evidence for example of the claimant treating trans patients entirely
appropriately, and with no complaints against her. Overall we did not
consider this aspect sufficiently clear to be held to amount to a lack of
credibility from her answer.
636. Some aspects of the attacks on the claimant’s credibility and reliability we
considered to be unfounded. There is we conclude nothing in the
allegation of some form of prior criticism of the claimant’s performance at
work in relation to a colleague who was a more junior nurse – the evidence
we did not consider came near to establishing any form of fault by the
claimant over that. The evidence was of an unblemished thirty-year career
until the Christmas Eve incident, and of there being no patient complaints
of any kind.
637. Whilst her evidence as to some of the posts she made was rejected as
discussed above, and they were potentially at least a breach of the NMC
Code that is not a matter for us and the context was a private group of
friends. Similarly there were a series of posts made by her husband which
she was asked about. They were not ones she herself had made, and she
denied sharing the views expressed in them. We did not consider them
relevant to our determination of her credibility and reliability. They were
not her posts, and there was insufficient to link her to them. She was also
asked about the position of a close family member’s sexual orientation.
We did not consider that that matter was connected to issues of credibility
and reliability in these proceedings.
638. It was also suggested by the respondents on the basis of these and similar
matters that the claimant was bigoted generally, which as stated she
denied. That is not the issue before us, and for similar reasons as in
relation to the allegation of transphobia we did not find that as an issue of
credibility. We considered that should not seek to determine the issues in
this case on the basis of such very generalised allegations.
639. The claimant holds the belief that those who are biologically male cannot
be female, and that the second respondent is a male person. That belief
is, following Forstater, a protected belief under section 10 of the Act.

4104864/2024 Page 150
Following FWS the claimant’s belief that the second respondent is male is
correct in law under the terms of section 11 of the Act, as we address
further below.
640. Although we did conclude that during the Christmas Eve incident she had
used language towards the second respondent that the claimant knew, or
ought reasonably to have known, would be offensive, we also accepted
that her concern that a person she regarded as male was entering a space
she regarded as one that was private for those who were biologically
female was entirely genuine.
641. She denied harassing the second respondent, stating that that was not
her intention when interacting with the second respondent. This case is
not, at least directly, one of a claim by the second respondent against the
claimant that the claimant harassed the second respondent. The
circumstances of their interactions are nevertheless relevant when
considering the claims of harassment in particular, including as one of the
sub-issues is whether the complaint by the second respondent was falsely
made, as she claims.
642. It was put to the second respondent in cross examination that the evidence
given on such matters was “a pack of lies”, and that the intent had been
to punish the claimant by securing her dismissal from employment and
being struck off by her professional regulator. The conflict in their two
positions was accordingly a stark one. Where there is dispute between the
claimant and second respondent, which lies at the heart of the factual
dispute in this case, we have preferred the evidence of the latter. That is
as some aspects of the claimant’s evidence we did not regard as being as
reliable as that of the second respondent. The principal area of dispute
between the claimant and second respondent was about what happened
around midnight on Christmas Eve 2023, which we address fully below.
643. Other parts of the claimant’s evidence were also in dispute and involved
other witnesses. One was that she had spoken to Ms Davidson on about
25 October 2023 to say something to the effect that if it happened again
that the second respondent was in the changing room she would have to
say something. Ms Davidson did not have any recollection of that
comment being made, and would not have reacted as the claimant
suggested of not replying, and in our view it is more likely that it was not
made. If it had been, we consider that Ms Davidson would have said
something about it to her, and remembered it, which is also what she told
Ms Glancey. She would not have encouraged the claimant to raise it
directly with the second respondent given the risk of regulatory breach by
the claimant.
644. The claimant’s position was that she had not said to Ms Curran on 30
December 2023 that she had confronted the second respondent, but that
was Ms Curran’s evidence, which we preferred on that point. We

4104864/2024 Page 151
considered that Ms Curran was being fair and balanced when interacting
with the claimant, and we did not consider that there was any mindset
against the claimant in any way.
645. Similarly, it was the claimant’s evidence, and put to Ms Davidson, that at
the meeting they had held on 3 January 2024 at which she had informed
the claimant that she was suspended that the claimant had been told that
she did not need a representative this time, but maybe next time. Ms
Davidson denied emphatically saying that, and we preferred her evidence
to that of the claimant on that, although the claimant’s recollection is likely
to have been impacted by the fact that she was taken entirely by surprise
at that meeting, having not had any advance notice of it.
646. The claimant accepted in cross examination that she could have raised
matters with her union or by written grievance, although she said that she
had not been involved in such a situation before. The claimant did also
acknowledge in her evidence that she was not a “rookie”, being someone
with thirty years of experience. She could have raised her concern as a
grievance either on or around 26 August 2023, or later when she was
concerned at the lack of response or when she did know of the response
from Ms Curran and then Ms Davidson.
647. That was also in the context of the second respondent saying to her during
the Christmas Eve incident, as she accepts, something about protocols to
follow by which was meant a reference to raising a grievance. The
claimant had a limited opportunity to do so on 28 December 2023 when
she was next at work, and shortly afterwards was placed on special leave,
but neither then nor when later suspended did she raise any form of
grievance about the second respondent being permitted by the first
respondent to be in the changing room. That does nevertheless require to
be considered in the context of the lack of a clear and written response to
the claimant as to her complaint, or her being referred to HR or the relevant
policies for example.
648. There are other aspects of the evidence given which did not have support
from other witnesses who might have been called by the claimant. The
claimant said that other members of staff were similarly concerned over
the second respondent using the changing room, but there was no
evidence of that called from those persons. Hearsay evidence was given
by the claimant of the views expressed to the claimant by a small number
of other staff. She said to the second respondent on Christmas Eve that
lots of other staff felt intimidated as she did, but no evidence of such a
feeling of intimidation was we consider presented.
649. Hearsay evidence is permissible but it is not the best evidence. The failure
to call any witness to give support to what she claimed was we consider
material to the reliability of her evidence. There was also internal
inconsistency in her evidence. Initially the claimant claimed support from

4104864/2024 Page 152
four staff, one of whom was a male, but on recall the number increased to
thirteen. That was a very surprising increase, which was not explained.
Her evidence on recall was in essence a list of names, not all being
complete names. Of the thirteen names given, four had male names,
being Daniel, Michael, Kevin and Kenny and there was no suggestion that
they would use the female changing room. Whilst they may have stated
their agreement with the claimant, they are not within the group suffering
disadvantage, or at least that was not in our view proved as we come to
below.
650. There were also three other persons she referred to as working on
reception (one of those said to be working there was included in the male
names). It was not made clear in the evidence whether they used the
changing room or not. Similarly we did not regard that as having been
proved. Another was a female consultant, and of all those who might have
been called to give evidence a consultant might normally be expected to
be willing to do so if that was indeed her belief.
651. The question of group disadvantage in relation to indirect discrimination
for those persons was not directly addressed in evidence, rather it
appeared to us to be more in the nature of supporting the claimant. What
the nature of that support was however was not specified in evidence. It
could be somewhere between also suffering what was perceived to be
disadvantage at one end of the spectrum, to supporting the claimant’s
raising of the issue, in essence supporting her perception and the right to
believe as she wished to, at the other, or a point between the two.
652. We were concerned at how reliable that evidence from the claimant was
for the issue of group disadvantage in such circumstances. There was
very little indeed to support it in our view in the documents before us,
including private group chats. There was a little support that could be
inferred from the conversation with Sharlene, and from the group chat to
a very small extent, and Dr Pitt referred to a meeting at which concern by
some staff at the second respondent’s use of the changing room was
referred to, but in our view that is insufficient to prove that there is a group
disadvantage. Had there been the level of support that the claimant
alleged we would normally have expected to see some more clear written
or oral evidence to that effect.
653. So far as the earlier incidents of what might be described as avoidance
was concerned the dispute concerned two occasions on which the
claimant is said by the second respondent to have left her position at work
because of the presence of the second respondent as a trans woman. The
evidence on that from the second respondent was we considered rather
thin. Neither issue had been raised formally at the time by the second
respondent, the first incident was not recorded in written form at the time,
and there is partly inconsistent evidence from the statement taken from

4104864/2024 Page 153
Ms Ashraf for the third incident that does not support the second
respondent’s view that the claimant refused to speak save through that
third party. It is possible that each matter was not the result of any animus
held by the claimant against the second respondent or transgender
persons in general terms, but for other and innocent reasons. It can only
be very difficult for the claimant to comment on a matter that had not been
raised with her at or around the time as an issue, and when it was raised
considerably later. That was evident from unclear evidence as to when the
missing patient matter happened, with the claimant suggesting that it was
on 31 October 2023 and the second respondent disagreeing.
654. Whilst there had been some general references in written notes made by
the second respondent to earlier incidents, and to an escalation, it was not
clear exactly what that escalation was intended to refer to. The claimant
agreed that on two occasions she had remained outside the changing
room when the second respondent was present, but denied that she had
acted as alleged on 26 August or between October and 18 December
2023 in a manner that adversely affected patient safety. In all the
circumstances, particularly as if it were true that the claimant had left a
position that might be detrimental to a patient that could affect patient
safety, where no allegation formally was made at that time, and as the
second respondent’s phone note as to the missing patient incident stated
in terms that it was not a matter of patient safety, we concluded that it is
not likely that either matter happened in any manner that affected patient
safety. No findings in fact on the matters in relation to any adverse impact
on patient safety are made accordingly.
655. In summary there were some areas on which we accepted the claimant’s
evidence, and others on which we did not.
656. On a small point of detail the claimant gave evidence of a brief meeting
with Ms Glancey about the investigation which she thought was in April
2024. The parties’ pleadings admitted that there had been a meeting
between them on 10 May 2024, but she was not asked about it in her
evidence. No written record of that meeting was produced. We inferred
from the evidence and admission that a brief meeting on that date took
place, as set out in the findings in fact.
657. Ms Forstater had prepared a detailed written witness statement, and in
that made reference to a number of publications some academic and
others governmental. We were concerned about that evidence, and that
of Mx Valentine for the respondents, as we shall come to further below.
So far as this witness was concerned however we considered that on a
number of occasions she did not give candid answers to the question
asked, but sought to answer it in a manner that supported her general
position which is gender critical. It was very clear that she had a strong
and partial view.

4104864/2024 Page 154
658. Mr Darren Peggie, Ms Nicole Peggie and Mrs Sheila Bell being the
claimant’s husband, daughter and mother respectively all gave brief
evidence. They stated what the claimant told them on Christmas Day 2023
about the incident at around midnight. They spoke of the claimant’s stating
that she was embarrassed and had felt intimidated. There was an attack
on Mr Peggie’s evidence in cross examination by reference to various
Facebook messages he had shared and one message about a particular
posting that he had authored. Whilst the messages would be regarded by
many as highly objectionable at the least, with comments that appeared
to be transphobic, Islamophobic, and with a more general racial element,
our task is to assess credibility and reliability for the issues before us. In
that regard we considered that Mr Peggie’s evidence, which was
supported by his daughter and mother-in-law, was sufficiently
corroborated to be accepted in relation to the claimant’s reporting of the
Christmas Eve incident, save that he said that the claimant felt scared,
which Ms Peggie did not say in her own evidence and which we did not
consider reliable accordingly.
659. Mr Borwick we considered did meet the Kennedy criteria for a skilled
witness as a person able to assist the Tribunal in its task; he had the
necessary knowledge and experience; and we considered that there is a
reliable body of knowledge or experience to underpin the evidence given.
The respondents challenged the reliability of his evidence and argued that
it was not impartial, the final part of the Kennedy criteria. He accepted in
hindsight that his comment that the second respondent was silent on the
fact that the notes could be rearranged suggested that the second
respondent was trying to mislead the Tribunal was irresponsible as it did
not have a factual basis. We were concerned that that remark indicated
that his impartiality was compromised, as it appeared to us that he was
essentially advocating matters for the claimant. His comments in his report
as to the fairness of the respondents producing evidence themselves,
including not by the instruction of a forensic witness to do so
independently, was he thought fair comment but again in our view goes
beyond the proper province of a skilled witness and was not impartial. The
fairness of matters is not a matter for such a witness, but the Tribunal.
660. These matters taken cumulatively led us to conclude that a material part
of his evidence was not reliable. That included the issue of the
screenshots which he suggested had been manipulated by the second
respondent. We considered that, given that lack of impartiality and that
this matter was an opinion he tendered as to what the screenshots as they
had been sent to him meant, that aspect of his evidence was not reliable,
a matter addressed further below. We assessed that aspect against the
evidence we heard as a whole, and that of the second respondent as
addressed below.

4104864/2024 Page 155
661. Taking his evidence as a whole, we concluded that the challenges to his
reliability did not succeed completely. We did not consider that his
impartiality had been so undermined that his evidence was to be
disregarded entirely.
662. The area of his evidence we did accept was exactly what note, or part of
a note, had been created on which date and at what time. That evidence
came from the data that had been extracted from the phone. Mr
Donaldson could not account for the date of creation of the 26 August
2023 part of the second respondent’s notes not being on or around that
date from the material before him, which he had helped to create, and Mr
Donaldson did not seriously dispute Mr Borwick’s findings in the sense of
having another explanation for the date given. We required to assess that
matter having regard to the evidence before us as a whole, as again we
shall come to, but on this as there was no clear evidence from Mr
Donaldson, who in any event was not a skilled witness as we address
below, we concluded that Mr Borwick’s evidence on this particular point
was reliable and could be accepted. That extended also to the detail of the
18 December 2023 notes, and what parts of the notes had been created
when on 25 December 2023.
663. Ms Moore was we considered seeking to give honest evidence, relaying
a conversation she held with someone who had called Sex Matters for
whom she is an Administrator, but it was entirely hearsay evidence from a
person who had not given any name, who could not be identified as a
member of staff of the first respondent accordingly, and who she accepted
could have been someone making mischief. The evidence was so lacking
in any form of provenance, and the detail said to have been given by the
person to whom she spoke so obviously being beyond any form of ability
to check whether it was accurate, that we considered that the evidence
was not sufficiently reliable to be of any assistance to us in determining
the issues before us.
664. The claimant on recall gave evidence in relation to messages she had
posted which are addressed above. She denied that when she had given
evidence in February and said that she was not racist she had not been
telling the truth, or that she was being vindictive towards the second
respondent.
665. She said that Ms Nicoll, Ms Wishart and Ms Curran had been lying about
remarks attributed to her. We considered it more likely that they were not,
and that the claimant’s evidence was less reliable than theirs, but that was
an issue of reliability and not directly relevant to a fact before this Tribunal.
666. We have referred above to the fact that the claimant gave thirteen names
of those who thought as she did, not all complete ones. Argument in
submission that there are a large number of female staff at the first
respondent supporting the claimant’s position, and that they are not

4104864/2024 Page 156
identifying themselves out of concern over the impact of that, is not
evidence. Our decision is based on the evidence led before us. Where
witness evidence could have been called to support the proposition, if
necessary on witness order or documentary evidence recovered after
securing a document order, and in light of our other findings as to
credibility and reliability of the claimant’s evidence, we did not consider the
claimant’s evidence sufficiently reliable to be accepted in this regard.
667. We add that the same principle of not accepting hearsay evidence when
primary evidence could have been led was adopted for such hearsay
evidence given for the respondents, for example that part of the evidence
which was hearsay given by Ms Nicoll as to what she heard the claimant
had said, which we address below.
Respondents’ witnesses
668. The second respondent was we considered a credible and broadly a
reliable witness. The second respondent was cross examined over a
period of three days, with questions asked referring continually to the
second respondent as a man, which the second respondent considers
misgendering and offensive, and in other contexts could be held to be
harassment under the Act. The cross examination went to the heart of how
the second respondent held a sense of identity. In the context of the
present dispute that was legitimate cross examination but we noted that
the second respondent was affected by that, even if there was a clear
attempt not to show that.
669. The second respondent answered all the questions in a calm and
considered manner. The suggestions included that the second respondent
was seeking to punish the claimant for standing up for her beliefs, to
paraphrase a series of questions. They were all denied in entirely
convincing terms. They were also supported by the written material. For
example, in relation to the 18 December 2023 incident the second
respondent wrote specifically in the document headed “Hate Incident
25/12/23” that that was “not a patient safety issue” and in the last sentence
the second respondent made clear that what was sought was an apology
and arrangements to ensure that it was not repeated such as changing
shift arrangements. That is not in our view the action of someone seeking
to punish the claimant, or have her dismissed, or struck off by the NMC,
as was the claimant’s argument. Nor is the failure to record at the time,
and raise at the time, the incident on 31 October 2023.
670. We considered it instructive that the second respondent did not seek to
have the claimant subject to regulatory proceedings, or a police
investigation despite that being raised by Dr Searle. The second
respondent did not pursue any claim against the claimant at the
Employment Tribunal. When making the report to Dr Searle on 25
December 2023 the message ended by stating that the second

4104864/2024 Page 157
respondent was unsure of what the resolution would be, but the second
respondent did not refer to dismissal of the claimant as a desired outcome.
That was consistent with the comments made by the second respondent
to Ms Glancey with regard to the use of the changing room, which referred
in essence to the possibility of the first respondent objectively justifying
excluding the second respondent from it. That attitude was also seen in
the email sent to Ms Glancey who asked about the witnesses to earlier
incidents to which the second respondent replied to the effect that for one
the second respondent could not recall and would understand if that went
no further.
671. In our view these matters supported our broad assessment of the second
respondent as a credible and reliable witness.
672. There were however a number of matters where it was alleged by the
claimant that the second respondent had lied to the Tribunal. The 26
August 2023 issue was not raised at the time. The 25 October 2023 was
the subject of an entry made by using Google Notes on the second
respondent’s mobile telephone on 26 October 2023. From the evidence
we heard we concluded that the second respondent had prepared the
entry for both of those two issues shortly after the second incident, and in
light of it. That the August 2023 incident had not been recorded in that
manner at the time it occurred but later was one factor we considered. We
concluded, from the evidence overall, that the second respondent had not
lied to us about it, but that contrary to the second respondent’s evidence
the notes were not all made contemporaneously, as addressed further
below.
673. The respondents were both aware from the report by Mr Borwick as to the
timing of creation of these notes being an issue, but did not lead their own
skilled evidence. They were aware that Mr Donaldson could not explain
that matter of timing although he understood that the second respondent
did not consider that the note for 26 August 2023 had been created on 26
October 2023. The second respondent had at least been asked about
when these notes had been created in cross examination.
674. The Tribunal did not place any weight on Mr Donaldson’s views on the
second respondent’s credibility, as that is a matter for the Tribunal itself,
not a witness. For this aspect the best evidence would be by way of a
skilled report by someone within the Kennedy criteria, which the
respondents have not placed before the Tribunal. We concluded that
which part of which note had been created when was accurately set out in
Mr Borwick’s report.
675. Some aspects of the evidence of the second respondent in relation to the
phone notes were we therefore concluded not accurate. Firstly, the overall
impression given in evidence was that each one was fairly
contemporaneous. Whilst on occasion the evidence was that the second

4104864/2024 Page 158
respondent “would have” written them on the day or next day, on other
occasions it was said specifically that they had been. The evidence from
Mr Borwick, not seriously contested by Mr Donaldson, establishes, in our
view, that the one of 26 August 2023 was not contemporaneous, but was
created about two months later. That must be set in the context that the
report from Mr Borwick was not prepared until after the second respondent
had given evidence. The second respondent had not therefore been able
to address Mr Borwick’s report in evidence. No application was made to
recall the second respondent to do so.
676. Similarly the note of the 18 December 2023 incident was initially drafted
that day, but changed again after the Christmas Eve incident, very early
on Christmas morning, That had not been stated in the second
respondent’s evidence.
677. The second respondent was also asked about preparing the note of the
Christmas Eve incident. Initially at least it was said in cross examination
to have been written in the car afterwards, and took about 20 - 25 minutes.
Mr Borwick’s evidence in his report, which on this issue we accepted, was
that it had been prepared and then changed on a number of occasions in
the early hours of Christmas Day. At the least therefore that answer was
incomplete.
678. The claimant argued that the evidence from Mr Borwick meant that the
second respondent was lying. We concluded that that was not correct. It
was inaccurate in part, but in our view honestly so. The second
respondent, we infer from all the evidence we heard, had forgotten about
the August note not being contemporaneous, and precisely how each of
the notes had been prepared, and when. The evidence on it was given
around eighteen months after the event.. It was clear to us from the
evidence both of the second respondent and Dr Pitt that the second
respondent had been severely impacted by the events. It is in our view
unsurprising that when giving evidence these details were not recalled
accurately.
679. Another chapter of the evidence was in relation to how the details of the
notes were obtained by Mr Donaldson with the second respondent’s
assistance and use of the mobile phone itself under his direction, and the
provenance of some screenshots that were taken. It was argued that
because of Mr Borwick’s report they were evidence of dishonesty by the
second respondent. We did not accept that. Firstly for the reasons given
above we did not consider that Mr Borwick’s evidence on that was reliable.
It was we considered different in kind to that as to what note was created
when. In light of when the events to create these documents took place
they were not raised with the second respondent in evidence. Whilst how
the process was conducted appeared to us somewhat odd, and Mr
Donaldson accepted that it was about the fifth most accurate way of doing

4104864/2024 Page 159
so, it was part of a voluntary process that the second respondent did not
require to participate in.
680. There is other evidence available beyond these notes which we consider
support the view that the second respondent’s evidence is reliable as to
what occurred during the Christmas Eve incident. In particular there is the
email to Dr Searle around three hours after the incident, and that to the
BMA on the day afterwards. Both have lengthy accounts of what
happened, as the second respondent described it, and each is broadly
consistent both with each other and the notes, as well as the oral evidence
given to us.
681. It appears to us that the evidence from Mr Borwick is not sufficient to
establish that the second respondent had been giving perjured evidence,
which is essentially what was argued. Nor did we consider that the second
respondent had misled Mr Donaldson or through him, this Tribunal.
682. It was argued for the claimant that the second respondent had deliberately
failed to produce the information that would prove the authenticity of the
screenshots. But in our view that goes too far. Firstly the second
respondent gave evidence in February 2025. Secondly the second
respondent did so after the claimant had closed her evidence. Thirdly this
case started with a Claim Form presented on 2 May 2024. There were a
number of Preliminary Hearings, including one held in November 2024
with an application for a document order. The claimant did not at that stage
seek any order for the said phone or its inspection.
683. The claimant thereafter did so on two occasions, and those applications
were refused by the Tribunal for the reasons given in two Notes. If the
second respondent had been seeking to conceal the improper use of the
mobile phone for recording notes or otherwise it would have been possible
to refuse to do anything in relation to it, and not offer to meet Mr Borwick,
a meeting the claimant’s team cancelled, or to undertake the meeting with
Mr Donaldson. That the second respondent did so voluntarily in such
circumstances is a factor we consider of materiality in considering this
issue, and it is to be considered in the context of all of the evidence that
we heard.
684. We have concluded therefore that these issues do not lead to a finding
that the second respondent has been untruthful either in evidence or in
relation to the documents submitted to Mr Donaldson and thence to the
claimant and Tribunal. What they have done is to cause us to be
particularly careful when assessing the reliability of the evidence given in
relation to the notes taken by the second respondent, which we have
attempted to do above and throughout. As we have noted, it is in our view
important that those notes are not the only documentary evidence before
us, and we have taken into account all of the material, both documentary
and from oral evidence, available to us.

4104864/2024 Page 160
685. Ms Cunningham argued that if an incident such as what was summarised
as the resus incident, or the missing patient incident, was a serious one of
patient safety that the second respondent had a duty to raise formally at
that time. Neither had been raised at the time either with a manager or by
Datix or similar. There was no clear evidence on the resus incident, as
what the claimant thought it may have been and what the second
respondent thought it may have been appeared to be two different
occasions.
686. The second respondent explained, in terms again that we considered
convincing, that it was not at that time of the resus incident a matter the
second respondent considered to be of patient safety as the patient’s
observations had been taken and the patient was settled. On reflection
following the Christmas Eve incident the second respondent considered
that as the issue was of adequate communication it should have been
raised with Dr Searle as the supervisor. The second respondent did that
on 29 December 2023, thus only after the Christmas Eve incident and not
when it took place in or around November 2023.
687. In our view this issue is partly at least one of timing. Given what we
consider is the understandable view the second respondent held at the
time, not raising the resus or missing patient matters before Christmas
2023 is we consider not an issue affecting the witness’s credibility or
reliability. It is a matter of the degree to which they were thought serious
at the relevant time. The claimant has argued that it was an exceptionally
serious matter that ought to have been raised formally if true. But in our
view, the evidence from the second respondent which we accepted was
that at the time it was not considered to be such, rather it was perceived
as an issue of lack of communication contrary to the manner the second
respondent preferred, a form of avoidance of the second respondent by
the claimant. It might have been raised both more quickly and formally,
including by way of a Datix for example, but we did not accept the
argument for the claimant that it had been made up deliberately by the
second respondent to punish the claimant.
688. The missing patient incident was one where the evidence of Ms Ashraf did
not fully support the second respondent’s version of events. Her statement
to Ms Glancey was that there had been a conversation. But who said what,
and how, was not set out. We did not hear from her as no party called her.
The second respondent prepared two notes of that incident, one on the
day and the other on Christmas morning. The claimant argues that that
was deliberately untruthful, but we do not consider that it was.
689. Ms Ashraf in her statement refers to a conversation. What the second
respondent referred to in the note of the exchange is that the claimant had
said that she had no concerns in answer in answer to a question asked by
Ms Ashraf and the second respondent had said thanks, and that the detail

4104864/2024 Page 161
was needed for a letter. There is at least some consistency between Ms
Ashraf saying that there was a conversation, in the sense that both the
claimant and second respondent spoke, and the second respondent
saying that the claimant had not acknowledged the second respondent as
her answer was given to a question by Ms Ashraf. In our view therefore
whilst the statement from Ms Ashraf does not support the second
respondent’s version fully nor does it entirely contradict it, and without the
evidence from Ms Ashraf having been heard we are left only with the notes
of the investigation meeting.
690. The statement from Ms Ashraf, and the note being done in two separate
parts, does not in our view mean that the second respondent did not
genuinely believe that matters had occurred as alleged by the second
respondent, such that the evidence given on that is not credible. We
consider that the second respondent had not addressed that missing
patient incident at the time, and did not record it in the Google Notes, as it
was another incident which was not considered particularly significant
then, and only was perceived to be so after the Christmas Eve exchange
in the second respondent’s perception.
691. In our view that is supported by the terms of the second respondent’s email
to the BMA on 26 December 2023. In that there is reference both to the
resus incident and the missing patient incident. The former is not dated in
that email, but what happened is set out and is essentially that unusually
the second respondent was asked to do the observations on a patient. It
does not state in terms that it is not a patient safety issue, but it is not
presented as a significant issue. The latter is stated in terms to be an
instance of rudeness not of patient safety. This is in the context of a private
message to the second respondent’s union seeking advice. It is in our view
most unlikely that when seeking advice in that situation the second
respondent would fabricate these matters. It was a private message. It
appears to us that it strongly supports the view we formed that the second
respondent had a genuine perception of a lack of communication from the
claimant, which was not a significant one of patient safety in the mind of
the second respondent at the two times of those events. It was raised as
background to the discussion on Christmas Eve.
692. Whilst the evidence of what occurred on both occasions is not entirely
clear, partly as Ms Ashraf was not called to give evidence by either the
claimant or the respondents, we do not consider that it was fabricated by
the second respondent.
693. For reasons we address above and below in our view there was no patient
safety issue in fact. It appears to us to have been a matter raised initially
by Ms Davidson from the information known to her at the time, which was
very limited indeed. But the words patient safety do not feature in the email
to Dr Searle sent on 25 December 2023 or the Datix report.

4104864/2024 Page 162
694. If however the second respondent did have a mindset of seeking to punish
the claimant for her views, as the claimant claimed, raising the issue of
patient safety on or around the time it happened would have been one
obvious way to do. It would have been both a matter for the first
respondent, and potentially one for the NMC. That it was not raised by the
second respondent in that manner we consider supports the evidence the
second respondent gave. It would also have been possible for the second
respondent to have raised a claim against the claimant [and first
respondent] under section 26 of the Act after the Christmas Eve incident.
No such claim was raised. What the second respondent stated in
evidence, which we accepted, was that the purpose of raising the matter
with Dr Searle was to avoid repetition of what had happened. That also is
not consistent with someone seeking to punish the other party, as if so the
obvious way to do so was to allege gross misconduct specifically so as to
seek dismissal.
695. The claimant argued that the resus and missing patient incidents had been
fabricated as part of the intention to punish the claimant. We did not agree.
Considering all of the evidence we heard, we considered that the second
respondent genuinely believed that each incident had occurred, that each
was essentially one of the claimant avoiding being with the second
respondent rather than directly one during which the safety of a patient
had been adversely affected, and each was either recorded or reported at
some point not wholly distant from the event as the second respondent
perceived it. In addition to the email to the BMA, in the investigation
meeting with Ms Glancey Ms Curran referred to a comment she had heard
to the effect that the claimant was leaving an area when the second
respondent was there. The source of that at best hearsay evidence was
not probed in questioning, and it was not the basis on which we decided
this point, but it is a minor adminicle of evidence which to a very small
extent supports the view that the second respondent had not fabricated
these two incidents.
696. There are other aspects worthy of comment in this chapter of evidence.
Whilst it is factually true that the second respondent gave Ms Glancey a
date range of October to December 2023 in the investigation meeting, and
the second respondent was aware that it was between the 25 October and
18 December incidents which reduced that range, doing so in our view
was not deliberately to prevent proper investigation of an incident that had
been made up, as Ms Cunningham suggested. The second respondent
was not asked by Ms Glancey for more details and refused to give them,
for example.
697. The second respondent accepted in cross examination that the claimant
may have had good reason to ask that the second respondent carry out
the observations such that the sense that it was unusual may have been

4104864/2024 Page 163
misplaced. That concession again in our view supports the credibility and
reliability of the second respondent’s evidence.
698. We similarly did not consider it likely that the second respondent would
start to fabricate allegations against the claimant when what was
essentially being sought at that time was to avoid a repetition of the
incident on Christmas Eve.
699. It was suggested that the second respondent’s account of seeing the
claimant on 28 December 2023 had been fabricated. We did not agree. It
was in our view supported by the message to Dr Higgins, and then that as
Dr Higgins was delayed the second respondent used the changing room
alone. It is unsurprising that the second respondent noticed the claimant,
but that the claimant did not notice the second respondent, in our view.
Whilst exactly what happened was not entirely consistently described by
the second respondent having regard to the evidence as a whole we
accepted that evidence.
700. There were some rather unusual questions asked in cross examination,
for example Ms Cunningham asked a question seeking to compare the
second respondent to the torturer in the novel 1984, to which objection
was taken and after the lunch adjournment but before a decision on that
was made it was withdrawn. It ought not to have been asked, but does
indicate the extent to which the second respondent’s position was
challenged in cross examination.
701. There was a disagreement between Ms Cunningham and the second
respondent as to use of language for the second respondent, for whom
the former used male pronouns and suggested that that was the second
respondent’s sex, and over issues as to biological sex and others. The
premise of several questions was that the second respondent was male
by sex, which the second respondent denied. The second respondent’s
position was that the sex of the second respondent was female. For
reasons we shall come to we did not agree that that was the case under
section 11, because of the FWS decision which was issued after the
second respondent gave evidence, but we accepted that the second
respondent’s evidence on that expressed a personal and sincerely held
belief both as to the sex held by a person, and on what basis sex can be
determined.
702. The second respondent did not consider that there was an agreed
definition of biological sex, and said that sex was a multi-faceted matter or
at least a matter that could be considered from a number of different
perspectives. The second respondent did not accept that a doctor deciding
sex at birth for the purposes of providing a birth certificate stating sex was
determinative, or necessarily reliable. The second respondent is wholly
entitled to hold and express those beliefs before us, but they are not in our
view the proper answer to the definition of sex as that word is used in the

4104864/2024 Page 164
2010 Act. That evidence was also not skilled evidence, as the second
respondent was naturally in the circumstances not impartial. On the
question of what sex the second respondent has for the purposes of the
2010 Act the FWS decision is determinative, and binding on us.
703. In summary there are some areas on which we accepted the second
respondent’s evidence, and others on which we did not, but in so far as
the Christmas Eve incident is concerned, we preferred the evidence of the
second respondent.
704. On a point of detail we should state that Ms Cunningham did not ask
intrusive questions about the second respondent’s body. That is not said
as a point of criticism. No birth certificate for the second respondent was
put before the Tribunal. But we inferred from the fact that the second
respondent is, as agreed by the parties, a trans woman, the evidence of
the second respondent that a trans woman is someone assigned male at
birth and now wishes to live as a woman, and from the terms of the
respondents’ submission, that the sex stated on the second respondent’s
birth certificate shortly after birth was male.
705. Ms Davidson was we considered a credible and generally a reliable
witness. She was clear and convincing in her replies to cross examination
in particular, and expressed views that were not set against those of the
claimant. For example Ms Davidson said that she was concerned that if
the allegation were true and the two parties were again in contact there
was a risk of the claimant acting in a manner that could be in breach of the
NMC Code. We considered that that evidence was firstly what the witness
genuinely did feel at the time, and secondly that there was concern for the
position of the claimant, as well as for that of the second respondent.
Another example is that it was put to her that she was afraid of the position
of the board in relation to gender critical beliefs and was compelled to
follow their line, which she entirely rejected, and stated simply that she
treated everyone with respect. We accepted that evidence.
706. Ms Davidson’s evidence, which we also accepted, was that the first time
she had spoken to Ms Bumba was at the end of August 2023, and not at
or before the second respondent started working for the first respondent
in July 2023 as the respondents had pled. Ms Bumba had also however
spoken to Dr Currer earlier, when a more general enquiry about trans
persons was made.
707. It was suggested that in the second meeting with the claimant at which Ms
Davidson had relayed the comments from Ms Bumba that the claimant
had said something to the effect that she would have to raise that with the
second respondent if it recurred, and that Ms Davidson had not replied.
That was the claimant’s evidence. Ms Davidson had no recollection of the
claimant making such a comment, and said that if it had been made she

4104864/2024 Page 165
would have said to the claimant to remain professional. That is in essence
what she said to Ms Glancey at her investigation meeting.
708. We preferred Ms Davidson’s evidence on those points to those of the
claimant as discussed above. In our view it is most unlikely that a manager
would not have reacted to the comment that the claimant alleges she
made. Ms Davidson’s evidence on this was we considered honest in
stating that she had no recollection of saying what was alleged, and her
evidence overall was commendably balanced as between the views and
positions of the claimant and second respondent. She was seeking to be
broadly supportive of them both, in our view, during these events. This
was before the incident on Christmas Eve, and therefore before any
articulated direct dispute between them. We consider it much more likely
that the comment the claimant alleged she had made about raising it with
the second respondent was not made.
709. It was in our view clear that there was a long delay between the claimant
raising the issue of the use of the changing room by the second
respondent and her receiving any answer to that. Whilst that may partly
be explained by Ms Davidson being on holiday for much of September
2023 it does not in our view fully explain it. Given the nature of that issue,
if Ms Davidson was not able personally to speak to the claimant we
consider that she ought to have asked Ms Curran or Ms Harris to do so. It
was clearly a matter of importance to the claimant given what she had
said, and although Ms Davidson believed that the claimant and second
respondent would not be on shift together in the meantime that did not
mean that the claimant was not entitled to a response to her query.
710. When that response was given on 25 October 2023 what Ms Davidson did
not do, and which we consider any manager in such a position ought to
have done, was to say something to the effect that if the claimant did not
accept the position of the first respondent she should put her complaint in
writing, including as a formal grievance under the relevant policies to
which she could have been directed, or by being advised to contact HR.
711. It was also suggested that in the meeting on 3 January 2024 Ms Davidson
had said, in answer to a question from the claimant as to whether she
needed trade union representation, something to the effect of not this time
but maybe next. She strongly denied that, as discussed above. Given the
concern for the claimant that Ms Davidson had it is we consider most
unlikely that she did say that. We did however have a concern that the oral
evidence Ms Davidson gave, which was to the effect that the claimant
stated that she did not wish to have representation at the meeting, is not
consistent with the letter sent the following day by her, which referred to a
decision to proceed with the meeting as representation would involve
delay. It appears to us that neither Ms Davidson nor the claimant is fully
accurate in their recollection. What is clear is that the guide to suspension

4104864/2024 Page 166
refers to representation for the employee where that is practicable, and it
is possible for Ms Davidson to consider that in the circumstances
representation was not practicable as the suspension was required that
day, but that the claimant was not told in advance of the purpose of the
meeting is in our view not best practice. But the circumstances were
unusual, and Ms Davidson reasonably considered that swift action was
necessary.
712. More generally we accepted Ms Davidson’s evidence as to why she had
suspended the claimant. When it was put to her that the claimant had
simply stood her ground during the incident after which all hell broke loose
she said “No. It was the manner of doing so”, and we considered that
reliable. It was put to her that other staff were frightened to report concerns
over the use of the changing room, and her response was that she did not
think that that was the case but that “you’d need to ask the staff”. That was
we considered a reliable answer, as was her rejection of a suggestion in
cross examination that she was frightened herself as a commitment to the
idea of gender trumping sex had a vice like grip at the first respondent.
She presented as someone not seeking to punish the claimant for her
views in any way, but to manage the situation as she understood it to be.
713. It was suggested that Ms Davidson was wrong that there were patient
safety issues, including as they were not documented and as Ms Curran,
who is said by her to have told her about them, denied that she knew
anything more than the Christmas Eve incident. Ms Davidson was
however adamant in her evidence that she did consider that there was an
issue of patient safety. We consider that her evidence on what she
considered at the time is reliable, although the historic factual basis for it
as a matter of fact – that the interactions between the claimant and second
respondent before Christmas Eve had involved a risk to patient safety –
was not. In our view it was the combination of what the second respondent
alleged from Christmas Eve, and the reference to escalation of prior
behaviours which involved essentially not communicating effectively on
the part of the claimant when working with the second respondent that led
to her view that patient safety could be compromised in future. We
consider that she did hold that view, and that it was a genuine one.
714. We consider that it is material that her view was supported by evidence of
others, particularly but not only Dr Searle. If it was true that the claimant
was not communicating adequately with the second respondent there
might have been an impact on the safety of a patient. Whether or not there
had been a lack of adequate communication and what had happened on
Christmas Eve was to be investigated, but we accepted Ms Davidson’s
evidence that there were two reasons for suspension, and one was her
concern over patient safety, even if that was not documented by her at the
time either in the suspension record, or when informing the claimant orally,
or in the letter of 4 January 2024.

4104864/2024 Page 167
715. We also accepted Ms Davidson’s evidence that she had had a
conversation with Dr Currer, who had received similar advice from Ms
Bumba, and that Dr Currer had said that she had sought that advice before
the second respondent started at the department. Dr Currer could not
recall the timing, and Ms Bumba did not recall speaking to Dr Currer, but
taking the evidence as a whole we consider Ms Davidson was likely to be
accurate on what Dr Currer had said at the time.
716. We considered that Ms Davidson should have communicated more fully
to Ms Bumba exactly what the claimant had said, and it might well have
been better to have written it down given its importance.
717. Ms Davidson can also be criticised for not completing a written risk
assessment for the suspension. It appears to us that she confused the
checklist with the risk assessment. She thought that a written risk
assessment had been passed to Ms Glancey, but Ms Glancey was clear
that she had not seen it. From the evidence before us it appears likely that
the written risk assessment document was not completed. That does not
mean however that a risk assessment process was not undertaken, but
that it was not properly documented.
718. These are matters to be set in the context of a very busy department, with
for example evidence given in evidence in chief of her practice of reading
emails during what was supposed to be her break, and the benefit of
hindsight. Ms Davidson had also very recently been promoted into her
position and was unfamiliar with the full terms of the process, in our view.
719. Ms Bumba was we considered a credible witness, who was clearly giving
honest evidence. There were some areas she could not recall, or not recall
in detail. That included the conversation with Ms Davidson which she
placed as summer 2023, where her evidence differed from that of Ms
Davidson. She thought that details of the gender identity of the person
involved had not been provided, but that was not consistent with an email
from Mr Doyle on 29 August 2023 which referred to the advice, that a
transgender woman was involved, and that the second respondent
(although not named) had a right to use the female changing room. That
contemporaneous record more closely aligned with Ms Davidson’s
evidence on this than Ms Bumba’s.
720. Ms Bumba said that she had said to colleagues that it could be deemed
discrimination not to allow access to changing room facilities which aligned
with the chosen gender or something to that effect, but the evidence of Ms
Davidson, supported by that of Ms Currer and the email of 29 August
2023, was that the advice had been of the trans person having the right to
use such facilities. We considered that the advice had been specifically
that there had been a right to do so rather than less clearly that it could be
discrimination not to allow it.

4104864/2024 Page 168
721. She could not recall exactly which policy documents for other Boards or
Trusts she had viewed such that when asked about those in the document
Bundle could not say if she had seen them, particularly from the (English)
Trusts, although she recalled some of them. A number had been added to
the productions for the July hearings. It appeared to us likely that she had
seen that for NHS Lanarkshire, but the other policies she was asked about
we considered were not established as likely to have been viewed by her.
Her evidence was to the effect that the policies were broadly to the same
effect, and we made findings in fact in light of her evidence.
722. She explained that she had considered the CoP: Services but it was not
clear whether she had fully considered the relevant provisions in all of
paragraph 13.57 particularly the sentence starting “However” and those in
the following three paragraphs, which all make clear that it is competent
to refuse access to a space such as a changing room to a trans person if
a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim, such that it would not
be correct to say that a trans person had the right to access the changing
room aligning with the gender they identified as having. That there was
she thought a right is, in essentials, what we consider her advice to Ms
Davidson had been.
723. Ms Bumba had had not considered the terms of the 2010 Act referenced
in paragraph 13.57 in the margin, being paragraph 28 of Schedule 3 which
qualifies section 29 as we shall come to further below, and did not at that
time directly address the issue of the protected characteristic of belief
under section 10, being that held by the claimant described as gender
critical. She had rather assumed from the policies referred to that trans
persons should access the changing room aligning with their preferred
gender. That was the very broad import of the various other policies that
were considered, even if she could not recall exactly which ones she had
seen at the time. There was a general consistency amongst those policies
raised with her in evidence in chief, even if NHS Highland had provisions
that appeared to go considerably further. These are however simply
matters of background as she could not recall seeing each of them at the
time.
724. Her consideration of the CoP: Services was entirely understandable in
relation to a policy being considered for patients, as it fell within the
provision of services by a service provider under Part 3 of the Act. But the
changing room being considered was for staff only, and that fell under Part
5 as to which the Code of Practice: Employment was relevant. She had
not visited the changing room being considered, and may not have known
that the sign said female staff only, although it would seem obvious that
that would be the case. What may not have been so obvious was who
used it and what other facilities to change clothing there might be.

4104864/2024 Page 169
725. We considered that she had not turned her mind to the position of a
member of staff in the changing room, as opposed to the provision of
services. That must however be set in context. The query was raised as a
general one, at a time when she was not aware of any dispute or difference
of view, beyond that someone was uncomfortable. More had been said by
the claimant than that, however, of which she was not fully aware.
726. Whilst she might with the benefit of hindsight have sought HR or legal
advice given the complexity of the point being raised we consider that it
was not obvious to her at the time that the matter was one liable to lead to
Tribunal proceedings such that at the time she simply followed her
understanding of a form of general policy. The issue she had been asked
about is one of substantial complexity, where opinions as to what the law
is differ markedly. That is seen from the very different submissions before
us, and our analysis of them below.
727. She considered that there was no policy within the first respondent on
which single sex facilities trans staff should use as it was not written, but
did agree that the practice was that each trans person should use the
facility that aligned with their gender identity. We considered that her
evidence of there not being the kind of policy PCP2 addresses was not
reliable. PCP2 accords with how matters were handled in practice, in our
view, and there was no specific evidence of how other trans staff had been
dealt with in regard to the use of changing rooms. We were satisfied that
had a similar query been raised for another member of staff the same
answer would have been provided, and that the first respondent did have
a PCP that trans staff should use the changing room (and other similar
facilities) which aligned with the gender that they had chosen and not the
sex assigned at birth, if they wished to.
728. Ms Malone was we considered a credible witness, who was broadly
reliable. She had never met the claimant. She could not recall some of
the details, such as whether or not she had seen a risk assessment carried
out by Ms Davidson before the decision to suspend was taken, which she
stated as Ms Davidson’s decision to take although she had given advice
on it. She explained her role in the process, and made reference to Mr
Doyle’s role initially as Clinical Nurse Manager, and from January 2024 as
Head of Nursing in Acute Services, another area to her own (she also
being Head of Nursing for Medical Directorate). It was difficult to
understand her role in giving advice about suspension, for which she said
she must have had sight of the risk assessment as advice could not be
given without it, and not in relation to the investigation as she might be on
the panel if matters went to a disciplinary hearing. But overall we
considered that she answered questions candidly and directly, and her
explanation that the suspension followed the Datix, and its reference to
the manner in which the claimant had raised issues directly with the

4104864/2024 Page 170
second respondent on Christmas Eve, which she regarded as
unacceptable from the report set out there, was compelling.
729. That was also in the context of her accepting that the emails sent by Dr
Searle in particular to consultant colleagues commenting on the
allegations should not have been sent, and breached the confidentiality of
the investigation. Whilst that investigation may not formally have started,
it was we considered obvious that one would be required, and Ms
Malone’s criticism of that, and other similar messages, we considered
supported our assessment of the reliability of her evidence.
730. Dr Pitt we considered an obviously credible and reliable witness, who
gave her evidence in an exemplary manner. We accepted her evidence in
its entirety. She explained the discussion held with the second respondent
shortly after the Christmas Eve incident, and about the degree of distress
exhibited by the second respondent which included an appearance she
described as being startled, and sobbing. She explained that in her view
consultants in the department required to be informed if there was to be
any change to rotas, or something that might affect a doctor at work, in
relation to Dr Searle’s email of 29 December 2023. We accepted that
evidence.
731. Ms Curran we considered to be a credible and reliable witness. We
considered that she was balanced and fair in what she said, and had
sought to address the matter reported to her in a manner that addressed
the impact on the claimant, for whom she was the line manager. We
rejected any suggestion that she was part of a conspiracy on the part of
the first respondent to punish the claimant for expressing her beliefs. As
she was involved in the initial stages including suspension her role in any
such conspiracy would have been important, but we accepted her
evidence that she simply acted to address the issues when they arose.
732. She stated that Mr Doyle decided to place the claimant on special leave,
and that was to allow time for advice to be obtained. Whilst Mr Doyle was
not called we accepted her evidence on that, which is consistent with the
written record and a measure of common sense.
733. She spoke to her interactions with the claimant, and the claimant’s
comment she had noted that the claimant had confronted the second
respondent. It was suggested in cross examination that that is not what
the claimant had said but Ms Curran’s descriptive word. We accepted her
evidence that that was the word the claimant had used. We also accepted
her evidence that the claimant had been informed in around October 2023
that there were alternative places to change if she wished to use them,
including the changing room in the main building and a well-being room in
the department which any staff member could use which had a locked
door.

4104864/2024 Page 171
734. She gave evidence that the claimant could have raised her concerns with
her managers, either in written form or by a formal grievance, rather than
by doing so with the second respondent directly. We accepted her
evidence on that issue. She denied that the claimant had been placed on
special leave for raising her beliefs, saying that it was because of the
manner in which she had done so. Whilst that is more properly
characterised as an allegation that the claimant had done so we accepted
that evidence subject to that clarification.
735. She said that the claimant had at least on occasion changed her clothes
in the toilet cubicle of the changing room. That was later supported by Ms
Wishart’s evidence, and we accepted it.
736. Ms Myles was we considered a credible and reliable witness. She
addressed the review of the claimant’s suspension, and decided that it
should be lifted, and a phased return put into place. It was clearly her
decision, not one dictated to her by others, and indeed her evidence that
Dr Searle, Dr Currer, Ms Davidson and Ms Curran did not agree with it
emphasised the impartial way in which she had conducted it. Her evidence
was we considered supportive of the claimant’s position that no patient
safety issue had arisen. We did not consider that Ms Myles’ actions in this
regard could possibly be part of some wider conspiracy, and the
independent manner in which she dealt with matters was a strong indicator
that no such conspiracy had existed.
737. She considered that there was no risk of the claimant impacting on patient
safety after having met her when the claimant gave her reassurance on
that, and decided that the claimant should return to work on a phased
basis when there was a senior nurse available for support. That required
it to be on day shift, and a compromise was reached on when that should
be. We accepted her evidence as to the reasons for those matters.
738. She had not had sight of any risk assessment initially carried out, and had
little documentation before her when she met the claimant, but considered
that helpful as leaving her with an open mind. It was not clear what
document she had in mind when stating on the risk assessment form that
no derogatory comments had been made by the claimant to the second
respondent. She had not found all of the documents provided to her. It
may have been the Datix summary, or the document titled “Hate Incident”
or neither of them. There was limited information given to her and far more
available to us.
739. She did not accept some of the points put to her in cross examination, but
did accept others, and the manner she did so we considered clear,
compelling and convincing. She had not been aware of the full
circumstances of the issue to do with the rapist in a prison, but was
informed of it later. Her view was that the terms used were not derogatory,

4104864/2024 Page 172
but part of a dispute over who said what where there was no independent
witness.
740. She considered that the allegations as to patient safety were not raised
formally at the time, were not documented, and that that indicated that the
allegations were in effect not reliable. She informed those who challenged
her decision of that, and they had not argued to the contrary with her. In
our view that was important evidence on those matters, and we accepted
it concluding that those allegations were not established on the facts as
noted above.
741. Dr Searle was we considered a credible, and subject to the restricted
qualifications we shall come to, a reliable witness. The qualifications are
firstly that she did not recall any discussion with Ms Myles regarding the
review of suspension, and some of the detail around the searches made
for documentation in accordance with the Order of 3 January 2025, and
secondly that she accepted that she was a supporter of the second
respondent. She was candid as to her role in that, considering that it was
part of her role as the medical and educational supervisor.
742. We considered that it was more likely that Ms Myles had been spoken to
by Dr Searle who disagreed with the decision to revoke the suspension,
partly as that is confirmed in an written answer to a question asked by the
claimant, but mainly as we accepted Ms Myle’s evidence on that. Dr
Searle’s actions in speaking to Ms Ashraf, a witness potential and that
despite the terms of the 14 April 2024 letter to her from Ms Glancey, were
not appropriate. She accepted that was the case on reflection about it
during cross examination, as she did other aspects of what she had done
which indicated that she had not maintained the confidentiality of the
process.
743. Overall however and subject to those qualifications we considered the
evidence Dr Searle gave as reliable. She responded to questions clearly
and convincingly. She accepted in a number of respects that messages
she had sent in relation to the investigation process, and actions she had
taken, were not appropriate, as addressed in the preceding paragraph.
744. She explained what the second respondent had told her at their meeting
on 29 December 2023 and why she regarded that as a hate incident. She
explained why she considered that the claimant’s actions had been
harassment, which was a combination of what she said was waiting for
the second respondent to be alone in the changing room, challenging the
second respondent repeatedly, making what were she considered
derogatory and offensive remarks. She stated that saying to someone who
identifies as a woman that the person was not was offensive, as it went to
the heart of who they considered they were. Similarly a comment as to
chromosomes was offensive in her view.

4104864/2024 Page 173
745. She commented on the context of the remark about the prisons incident,
which she considered was a comparison between the second respondent
and a person who was a convicted rapist, who had after the offences
commenced a transition to a female, and where there had been a
contentious placing in a female prison initially. These and other matters
led her to the view that what had happened was a hate incident, from the
content of the remarks, and the manner in which they had been made.
746. We considered that compelling evidence. Whilst the fact that she was a
supporter of the second respondent, and to an extent acted as a
representative for the second respondent both when speaking to a
potential witness, and attending as a companion for the second
respondent at the investigation meeting meant that she was not impartial,
we considered her evidence reliable. We also considered it reliable in her
view that where an issue of concern arose there were proper methods of
raising that, in essence formally through line management or other
channels, and not directly with the second respondent in person. We
considered that consistent with the letter of outcome from the first
respondent to the claimant, but also more widely our own views as to what
was appropriate, as we discuss below.
747. Dr Searle said had she had no reason to disbelieve what the second
respondent told her on 29 December 2023 and she described the degree
of upset felt by the second respondent at that time. That was consistent
with Dr Pitt’s evidence from 25 December 2023. In her role as supervisor
it was we considered an understandable human reaction to seek to
comfort the second respondent and offer assistance. Dr Searle’s acts
were not in our view part of a conspiracy against the claimant or anything
similar to that.
748. It was alleged in particular that Dr Searle had been involved in a deliberate
attempt to cover up the email of 5 January 2024 from Dr Currer, and that
her upset in evidence was not genuinely because of concern for a
colleague but was concern for herself. We accepted Dr Searle’s evidence
on both matters, which was to deny them. The first respondent’s failure to
comply with the document order of 3 January 2025 is widespread and
concerning, but so far as Dr Searle was concerned was not deliberate
flouting of it. There was no conspiracy to withhold evidence in our view.
749. Ms Harris we considered to be an obviously credible and reliable witness.
She had a limited role to play, passing on a message from Ms Malone as
instructed, and when doing so enquired as to the claimant’s well-being.
We accepted her evidence that she had not been involved in any attempt
to cover up the 5 January 2024 email.
750. Ms Glancey we considered to be a credible and subject to some
qualifications a reliable witness. Her role was as investigator from when
appointed on 29 February 2024, but it took until 13 December 2024 to

4104864/2024 Page 174
finalise the report. That was an exceptionally long period of time. In
January 2024 the sensitivity of the matters raised was noted by senior
managers of the first respondent. On 16 April 2024 it was being said by
the Central Legal Office who were in effect acting for the first respondent
that it was a matter of urgency, and that was passed on internally. In our
view however it was not treated as that. There were a number of reasons
for the delay, and some of them were entirely justified. For example, an
investigation meeting was proposed with the claimant on 2 August 2024
and she wished it to be delayed. But why it took until 2 August 2024 to
arrange that meeting was not we considered properly explained.
751. The investigation policy refers to having a meeting with the person
complained about at a relatively early stage as a possibility. Once the
second respondent’s statement was received on 23 January 2024 there
was an understanding of what was being alleged. Ms Glancey had that
when she was appointed. There was a delay until the letter inviting the
claimant to a meeting and setting out the allegations on 12 April 2024. It
followed a period of annual leave of two weeks. The period of most of
March 2024 does not appear to have involved any action on the
investigation, despite the circumstances referred to. Why that was we
consider was not explained.
752. Why other arrangements were not made when Ms Sinclair-Forrow was off
work through illness were not explained. We would have expected any
employer of any material size, quite apart from one as large as the first
respondent, in such a situation not only to recognise the importance of the
matter but to act on that by giving it a priority for as full and quick an
investigation as possible, when memories were as fresh as possible. That
was not done, again for reasons not fully explained.
753. There were witnesses who might have been interviewed who were not,
such as the person known as Shwayts and Ms Wishart. The position as to
the allegations over patient safety was at best unclear. It was not initially
included in the allegations, but latterly was, where the evidential basis for
that was not clear to us, nor was it fully explained.
754. Ms Glancey denied the various suggestions put to her of a form of
conspiracy both to punish the claimant for challenging the view that the
second respondent was a woman, and to cover up documentation and
decision making around that, including in relation to patient safety
concerns. We accepted her evidence rejecting those and other criticisms.
Whilst the time taken, and how each of the claimant and second
respondent were kept informed of the process, was markedly different we
considered that Ms Glancey sought to investigate the issues raised
impartially.
755. Ms Hamilton was we considered a credible and reliable witness. Her role
had been a form of temporary one, standing in on some of the occasions

4104864/2024 Page 175
when a colleague Ms Sinclair-Forrow was not available through illness or
otherwise. She was not directly involved in the detail of the matter. She
also rejected the allegations of the first respondent wishing to punish the
claimant, or of the conspiracy to conceal documentation. We considered
that her evidence was clear and convincing, and we accepted it. We did
however consider it not explained by the first respondent why she, or a
colleague, could not have been involved in the investigation more fully
when Ms Sinclair-Forrow was unable to.
756. Mr Donaldson we considered to be a credible witness. He did not meet
the criteria in Kennedy for a skilled witness as he was employed by the
first respondent. If his evidence had been simply that detail of dates of
creation and editing of notes on Google Notes had been obtained, that
would have been a matter of fact. His evidence sought however to go
beyond that, even to giving an opinion on the second respondent’s
credibility.
757. He was not able to provide an explanation for the Google Notes record to
the effect that the entry in the second respondent’s notes which had the
heading “Weird incident 28 August 2023” was created on 26 October
2023, and later edited. His belief that the second respondent was
surprised when that was ascertained during their Teams meeting, and was
believed by him, is of very little evidential value. Both respondents having
had information from Mr Donaldson and sight of Mr Borwick’s report did
not tender their own skilled witness who did meet the said criteria. They
must have been aware that Mr Donaldson could not offer an explanation
for what they argued as a potential anomaly as to dates of creation. As he
accepted in his evidence, one possible explanation for that was that the
second respondent had not accurately reported when the note was
created, or had been dishonest about it, and another was that there was
an unexplained issue with how the creation date and dates of editing had
been recorded electronically. The evidence Mr Donaldson gave was
therefore materially limited both generally and particularly when set
against the evidence of Mr Borwick.
758. Dr Currer was we considered a credible and generally reliable witness,
with that reliability subject to one qualification. She candidly accepted that
her email of 5 January 2024 which contained a comment that the claimant
had been referred to the NMC was factually inaccurate, and that she knew
that at the time. She had no explanation for it being there. The fact of there
being such an important detail so obviously inaccurate, however candidly
accepted as such, was a qualification to the extent to which her evidence
could be accepted, but we considered that the evidence otherwise given
was reliable. The email to which we have referred sought in our view to
address the management of the dispute between the second respondent
and the claimant. Dr Currer did not have any form of line management
responsibility for a nurse, but was involved in that to an extent for a doctor,

4104864/2024 Page 176
such as the second respondent. She was a senior member of the team of
consultants.
759. She gave evidence about matters of biology which we accepted. She
accepted a number of propositions put to her in cross examination in a
commendably candid and clear manner. We considered her evidence on
those matters to be entirely reliable. She had a degree of knowledge that
was greater than that of Dr Searle who accepted that it was not her area
of particular knowledge. Although Dr Currer was not a skilled witness in
the Kennedy sense, as she is employed by the first respondent, it
appeared to us that the evidence should be accepted coming from a senior
consultant whose experience and qualifications she spoke to in her
evidence, on which we consider there is support from Connor. She denied
some of the allegations put to her, including that she had attempted to
mislead the Tribunal from her evidence in chief, and we accepted those
denials as credible and reliable.
760. Ms Wishart was we considered credible, but on a number of questions
she was asked in examination in chief could not remember what had
happened. For example she remembered no detail of what happened
during her presence in the changing room on 24 December 2023, which
is not surprising given the passage of time and that she was not
interviewed in the investigation by the first respondent, and she could not
recall what derogatory comment about the second respondent she said
that the claimant had made at a lunch in September 2023 when others
were present, but had been told what those comments were afterwards.
That was we considered hearsay evidence which was not the best
evidence, as we addressed above.
761. She said that she thought that the claimant did have the same views as
were put to her in social media posts of the claimant’s husband, but her
view on that is not we considered reliable evidence. One aspect in
examination in chief was a remark the claimant, she said, had made about
a mosque being built in Kirkcaldy where the claimant was alleged to have
said that she had a good mind to post bacon through it. When that was
said to have happened however was not something that she recalled. This
was an issue of potential relevance to credibility of the claimant, but was
so vague as we considered of no evidential value.
762. The aspects of the evidence Ms Wishart gave which we did consider
reliable included that the second respondent changed in the changing
room in a modest manner by turning the second respondent’s back when
doing so, and in cross examination when she stated that she had seen the
claimant change her clothes in the toilet cubicle of the changing room on
a number of occasions. That was evidence consistent with that given by
Ms Curran and not consistent with that of the claimant who had denied
that. The manner in which that detail was given and the clarity with which

4104864/2024 Page 177
it was done was both credible and reliable in our view. We also considered
that had the second respondent not changed out of scrubs at the same
time as Ms Wishart and Shwayts that was the kind of matter that Ms
Wishart was likely to have recalled.
763. Ms Nicoll gave evidence we considered credible and generally reliable.
She had made a number of comments in writing which were indicative of
a view contrary to that of the claimant, including a comment on two
occasions to the effect that she hoped that the claimant would be struck
off. We were however of the view that she was candid in her answers,
accepted criticism of what she had said on a number of occasions, and
we accepted both that the claimant had made comments Ms Nicoll
perceived as racist, and that the claimant had called the second
respondent a “weirdo”. That was something that was not so much disputed
in cross examination but suggested as a form of fair comment. It was
suggested that Ms Nicoll was simply out to get the claimant struck off, and
that her evidence was an attack on the claimant. We concluded that that
was because Ms Nicoll so vehemently disagreed with the views the
claimant had expressed, including by sending a series of racially offensive
supposed jokes but also by her comments in relation to the second
respondent. Whilst we required to treat her evidence with substantial
caution in light of the adverse commentary against the claimant, we
accepted her evidence that the claimant had called the second respondent
a weirdo, which was consistent with a message the claimant had sent.
More generally however for reasons addressed above we did not consider
that her evidence affected the assessment of credibility and reliability of
the evidence of the claimant.
Witnesses not called
764. Parties did not call witnesses who might have been tendered. As noted
above for the claimant that included one or more of those of her colleagues
on the issue of group disadvantage for the claim of indirect discrimination.
It also includes Ms Ashraf. If the claimant believed that she could give
evidence helpful to her she could have been called if necessary on witness
order, although the point arises more forcefully for the first respondent.
She did not call Mr Fraser.
765. For the respondents the list is longer and includes the person known as
Shwayts, Mr Doyle who is said to have decided special leave and had
some form of role in the investigation process, knew of the complaint that
the claimant had made to Ms Davidson but did not seem to raise that as
a concern over her acting as investigator, Ms Shepherd who was involved
in the suspension and related matters, Ms Beveridge who commented on
reputational damage, Ms Raynor who suggested reminding the claimant
about confidentiality, those from HR such as Ms Sinclair-Forrow who was
principally involved in the investigation, and those who commented on the

4104864/2024 Page 178
suspension particularly Ms Herkes, Ms Ashraf who was interviewed in the
investigation, and a skilled witness in relation to the mobile telephone in
so far as Mr Borwick’s evidence was to be challenged. There are a number
of questions that might well have been asked of such witnesses, including
simply by way of example the reasons for the suspension and the absence
of a written risk assessment document of Ms Shepherd, and of Ms
Sinclair-Forrow why she wrote in the terms she did on 14 May 2024 which
was after the Claim Form had been presented, which included the reason
said to be for attending the changing room in paragraph 11, which was
contrary to what her letter suggested.
766. We can if we consider it appropriate draw inferences from the absence of
such a witness. As the Supreme Court addressed in Efobi, whether
inferences should be drawn from the failure to call a witness depends on
all of the evidence and circumstances.
Evidence generally
767. Where a document was not referred to in the oral evidence, or within the
written witness statements of Ms Forstater or Mx Valentine, we did not
consider it. It was simply a document that had been tendered, and the
risks of considering a document only on that basis were illustrated by a
dispute over a letter dated 15 May 2024 that the first respondent said had
been sent to the claimant which the claimant said had not been received.
768. In our view this is trite law in Scotland, but we refer to Employment Tribunal
Practice in Scotland at paragraph 8 – 170 [that being a publication of which
the Judge is one of the two current editors but where this paragraph long
predates his involvement] which states:
“It is of crucial importance to note that productions do not become
part of the evidence in the case until they have been referred to at
the hearing and admitted in evidence. It is not unusual for a party
to proceed on the misunderstanding that any documents which are
included in the volume of productions will be taken into account by
the Tribunal. This is not the case.”
769. The exception to that is where there was email correspondence between
the parties solicitors, which they had arranged for inclusion within the
Bundle, some of which was spoken to in evidence, and we inferred from
these facts that the parties had agreed that the emails between their
representatives which had been produced before us had been sent and
received.
770. The claimant in her first written submission referred to issues concerning
the second respondent’s registration with the General Medical Council. It
included reference to the former names used by the second respondent

4104864/2024 Page 179
prior to commencing to transition to female. That had not been addressed
in any of the evidence led in the case.
771. When an issue arose between the parties as to whether the submissions
ought to be made publicly available the Tribunal enquired of the claimant
through her solicitors about when the evidence on those matters had been
given. The reply dated 12 August 2025 accepted that the point had not
been put to witnesses but stated that, as it was from a public record and
they thought it was not in dispute, there was no need to (paraphrasing the
message). The claimant’s representatives were invited to provide
authority for that proposition, and did so by reference to commentary in
Walker on matters of public record, with further comment that the record
in question is available online. The paragraph of Walker founded on states
as follows:
“19.28.1.Authorised copies of registers or lists kept under statute
relative to the practice of certain professions or certificates granted
by persons appointed to keep these records are generally sufficient
evidence (although the statutory provisions are not all uniform); the
appearance of a person’s name in them is evidence of his name
having been duly registered or entered. The absence of a person’s
name from the list or a certificate to that effect is equally evidence
of non-registration of that person. Examples of professions whose
registers or rolls are in this position are architects, dentists, medical
practitioners, nurses and midwives, osteopaths, solicitors and
veterinary surgeons.”
772. The claimant argued further that the GMC Register constitutes a list kept
under statute, it being a register required by operation of sections 2 and.34
of the Medical Act 1983. Copies of entries said to be from that Register
were produced.
773. In the view of the Tribunal, the proposition suggested by the claimant is
not correct. A fact that is not admitted, or within judicial knowledge,
requires to be proved. A basic minimum of evidence is needed to do so.
The Tribunal cannot hope to know what evidence a party wishes to rely
on without that being put before it, whether it is said to be as a matter of
public record or otherwise. The other party does not have any fair notice
of what document is sought to be relied upon. Finlayson v McMahon
[2022] EAT 30 held that a case management order as to documents to be
relied upon required to be complied with, and that documents could not,
in effect and using words not in the EAT report, be sprung on the other
party. The GMC records referred to were not in the documentation before
the Tribunal, nor were they referred to in evidence at all.
774. The Tribunal did not consider that the matters within such a record,
provided only at the stage of submission, had been proved as facts. The

4104864/2024 Page 180
extract from Walker states firstly that an authorised copy is required, which
we did not consider had been done, and secondly that where that is done
they are “generally sufficient evidence”, which we take to mean that a
witness from the register is not required to speak to them, but if a copy of
the part of the register is provided as a production in the case the evidence
from that professional register is sufficiently proved.
775. The start of the chapter in which paragraph 19.28 appears explains that
whether the document itself requires to be proved and whether and to
what extent it is evidence of the facts stated in it must be considered in
relation to individual categories of documents rather than generally, and
refers to Kapri v Lord Advocate 2014 SLT 557 which stated that “there
is no general provision which allows the court to hold as proof of fact,
merely by their publication, the contents of reports or other papers
emanating from government departments, international governmental or
non – governmental bodies, or academic or research institutions.” In our
view that supports the conclusion that where a public record of this nature
is to be founded upon it requires to be produced, or if not produced for the
fact within it to be addressed in oral evidence.
776. In British Transport Police v Norman UKEAT/0348/14 it was said that
there may be cases where the facts were agreed or the matter could rest
solely on submission, adding “where however a contentious factual matter
is relied on there has to be some evidential basis for it (assuming no
agreement as to how it should be treated).” Albeit in a somewhat different
area the need for a minimum level of evidence before inferences can be
drawn was raised in Andrew and another v NHS Education Scotland
[2025] EAT 115.
777. The claimant however had not produced that within the documentation
before the Tribunal until after the evidence for all parties had been closed,
nor had she asked the second respondent about such matters when the
second respondent gave evidence. The facts that the claimant sought to
argue had been established by reference to the register at submission the
Tribunal did not consider had been sufficiently established before it, it
rejected the claimant’s argument in that regard, and the matters the
claimant raised in that regard were not included in the facts as found
above as a result.
778. Not dissimilarly in the final written submission made by the respondents
there was reference to the second respondent’s circumstances in
paragraph 18, which had not been any part of the evidence. That is, as we
have noted above, impermissible. We did not include those matters in the
findings in fact accordingly.
779. On 13 and 16 October 2025 the claimant sought to introduce what was
new evidence in the form of a policy of the first respondent, which policy
we did not take into account, again for the reasons given above.

4104864/2024 Page 181
Discussion
780. This Tribunal was constituted as a full Panel, with each of the three
members contributing to the decision, which was unanimous.
781. It is we consider important to make the general point that this case is not
a form of public inquiry into gender critical beliefs as a protected
characteristic, the rights of those with the protected characteristic of
gender reassignment, or how the NHS as a whole has responded to
managing the differences there may be between those with those two
protected characteristics. Some parts of the evidence led for the claimant
appeared to us to be more relevant to arguments in the public domain, or
at a political level. That was so particularly in the evidence of Ms Forstater
and Mx Valentine, and from some of the documentation produced and
referred to in their written witness statements. It is also not our function to
decide wider policy issues such as whether the 2010 Act is in the most
appropriate terms, or could benefit from amendment. Those are issues for
the legislature. We must construe the Act in the terms in which it has been
enacted.
782. The case has at its heart the conflicting beliefs of the claimant and second
respondent, the separate protected characteristics each holds, what has
happened in interactions between them, and how the first respondent
acted in that context. The claimant challenges the permission she admits
that the first respondent gave the second respondent to use the changing
room, arguing that it was necessarily unlawful under the Act. For reasons
we shall come to it appeared to us that that matter does require to be
determined in order properly to analyse the claims made: for example as
part of the background to what is reasonable as a perception, and an
aspect of the other circumstances, under section 26(4) of the Act. We
shall consider that issue initially, and then some of the other more
significant areas of dispute between the parties, before addressing the
matters from the List of Issues prepared by the parties.
Was the first respondent’s grant of permission to the second
respondent to use the female changing room inherently
unlawful under the Equality Act 2010?
783. The second respondent did have a legal right to use the changing room
on one rather simple basis, from being given permission by the first
respondent as the owner of it, but whether or not it was lawful under the
Act is a separate question. The claimant was in our view correct to say
that this issue is of central importance in the case. The claimant (and
interveners For Women Scotland) argued in basic summary that it was the
inevitable outcome of the decision of the Supreme Court in FWS. The
respondents argued in basic summary that the Supreme Court decision
did not have the effect contended for by the claimant, and that the
permission was lawful as it followed the guidance in the CoP: Services.

4104864/2024 Page 182
784. We therefore start our analysis by considering the Supreme Court
decision. The context for that case was a claim initially pursued in the
Outer House of the Court of Session for judicial review of a decision of the
Scottish Government to issue statutory guidance as to the Gender
Representation on Public Boards (Scotland) Act 2018 (“the 2018 Act”).
That Act set an objective that 50% of the non-executive members were
women, and women were defined essentially to include those with the
protected characteristic of gender reassignment under the 2010 Act. After
an initial successful challenge by judicial review new guidance was issued
that a person with a Gender Recognition Certificate (“GRC”) under the
2004 Act in the acquired gender of female was a woman for the 2018 Act.
785. It was argued by the Petitioners, in very brief summary for the aspect
relevant to the present case, that the part of the guidance which included
a trans woman within those who are women for the purposes of the 2018
Act was unlawful. The argument was made under Part 3 of the 2010 Act
in relation to public services. It was not accordingly a case within the
context of a claim by an employee against an employer, made under Part
5 of the Act, as we address further below.
786. The Supreme Court noted that the central issue in the appeal before it was
whether the terms “sex”, “woman” and “female” in the 2010 Act are to be
interpreted as including those with a GRC in the acquired gender of
female. It considered what it termed biological sex and certificated sex,
where the person had been issued a GRC. The decision commented on
the distinction between individual rights and group rights, as well as
individual and group duties.
787. It held that the terms “sex”, “woman” and “female”, and the male
equivalents, when used throughout the Act were to be construed as a
matter of biology, and that sex was binary and immutable. It held that a
trans woman retained the sex assigned at birth for the purposes of section
11, which was male, and that the person was not a woman for the
purposes of the Act. It meant that the grant of a GRC under the 2004 did
not determine the position of sex under the 2010 Act. The statutory
guidance was held to be unlawful.
788. It follows from that decision, and the evidence we heard, that the sex of
the second respondent for the purposes of section 11 is male, that being
the second respondent’s biological sex (as that term is explained in FWS).
Analysis of claimant’s argument
(i) The Supreme Court decision
789. The question that arises from that conclusion is whether the application of
the Supreme Court decision must mean that, under the provisions over
which this Tribunal has jurisdiction under the 2010 Act as to work, the

4104864/2024 Page 183
second respondent as a biological male required to be excluded from the
female changing room, such that the permission given by the first
respondent to do so was necessarily unlawful under those provisions. We
have concluded that the answer is in the negative.
790. Firstly the court did not seek to address that question. That is unsurprising
as it was not the question before it. It answered a different question as to
the interpretation of the words “woman” “man and “sex” in the Act in the
context of a case pursued under Part 3 in respect of public services. The
Supreme Court did not address the different question of how an employer
should determine matters where two or more protected characteristics are
in conflict under Part 5, where there are material differences from the
provisions applicable to public services, as we address in the next section.
791. Secondly, there are different protected characteristics under the Act but
there is nothing stated specifically within the Act itself, or the court’s
decision, that one protected characteristic takes precedence over any
other. In Forstater v CDG Europe and others UKEAT/0105/20 the
Employment Appeal Tribunal had emphasised that:
"It is important to bear in mind that the [Equality Act 2010] does not
create a hierarchy of protected characteristics."
792. The Supreme Court endorsed that decision as “a comprehensive and
impressive judgment”. We consider that the court would not have made
that unqualified comment if it did intend to create a hierarchy of protected
characteristics with sex at the top of that hierarchy. Had doing so been
intended, we consider that that would have been stated explicitly.
793. That one protected characteristic does not take precedence over any other
is also consistent with how different human rights are addressed, which is
also equally. In Lee v Ashers Baking Co Ltd [2018] UKSC 49, the
Supreme Court similarly highlighted the necessity of balancing competing
human rights without holding that one has priority over any other. The
court noted:
"The rights to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, and to
freedom of expression, enshrined in articles 9 and 10 of the
European Convention on Human Rights, are protected by sections
6 and 13 of the Human Rights Act 1998. The rights to respect for
private and family life, and to freedom from discrimination,
protected by articles 8 and 14, are also engaged. There is no
hierarchy of rights; all are to be treated with equal respect."
794. The concept that each right is to be treated with equal respect is echoed
in Article 1 of the Convention which confirms that the rights apply to all
within the jurisdiction of the state. The claimant’s Article 8 or other rights
do not necessarily take precedence over the Article 8 or other rights of the

4104864/2024 Page 184
second respondent, or vice versa. We did not consider that the Supreme
Court sought to give the Article 8 rights of a woman any priority over the
Article 8 rights of a trans person. If it had intended to do so in our view not
only would that have been made explicit but the court would also have
explained why it was required and was a departure from case law both
under the Act and in relation to the human rights provisions we have
referred to above.
795. Although the respondents’ submission addressed the extent to which the
decision created a hierarchy of rights, the Supreme Court decision did not
in our view purport to do so. What it did was to define the terms, not how
the protected characteristic of sex was to be assessed in relation to other
protected characteristics where they applied.
796. Thirdly, the claimant’s contention was in our view not consistent with the
court’s comment that
“we have concluded that a biological sex interpretation would not
have the effect of disadvantaging or removing important protection
under the EA 2010 from trans people (whether with or without a
GRC).”
797. After that comment the court explained that a person with gender
reassignment as a protected characteristic could pursue a claim of direct
or indirect discrimination, or of harassment, if the circumstances so
warranted. There was no qualification to it to the effect that that was not
applicable in, for example, the context of a single sex space under Part 5
of the Act. If their decision had been that all trans persons must be
excluded from the changing rooms or toilets for the sex they identify with
because it was not the sex assigned at birth, and may also be excluded
from the changing rooms or toilets of their biological sex, that in our view
certainly does impact on their rights under section 7.
798. Were the claimant’s contention to be correct that would have the effect of
materially reducing the extent to which that protected characteristic could
be relied on by trans persons, to their disadvantage. What was desired by
the trans person when living their life may not be permitted in a large
number of practical instances, and would not have been consistent with
the view expressed by Lady Hale in Work and Pensions, and the line of
authority in relation to human rights. Such a construction in our view would
also not be consistent with the interpretation of the Equal Treatment
Directive from the CJEU and its predecessor as referred to above, which
remains as assimilated law, and would not be consistent with a purposive
interpretation still required. The development of the law in relation to what
is now the protected characteristic of gender reassignment is set out
above. At the very least we would have expected these considerations to
have been addressed specifically.

4104864/2024 Page 185
799. Fourthly the rights relied on by the claimant are different and each requires
separate analysis, in this case being under sections 13, 19, 26 and 27.
There is nothing specific within any of those provisions that necessarily
requires that the construction argued for by the claimant be followed, and
as we shall come to the provisions relevant to those sections are materially
different to the provisions relevant to public services.
800. Fifthly the Supreme Court in making its analysis held that “an
interpretation that produces unworkable, impractical, anomalous or
illogical results is unlikely to have been intended by the legislature”. We
take from that comment that the Act is, so far as possible, to be construed
so as to make it workable as the Parliamentary intention is likely to have
been to do so.
801. If the claimant’s construction was right, it would strictly have the effect that
no male plumber, tiler, electrician or other tradesperson could enter the
female changing room or toilet to make repairs, and no female
tradesperson could enter the male changing room or toilet to do so. It
would similarly mean that no cleaner could enter those rooms to clean
them where they were of the opposite sex of that for the facility. It would
also mean that a trans man who had had surgery and medical treatment
to align that person’s body as far as possible with that of a male could be
required to use the female changing room as that aligned with their
biological sex, or excluded from the female facilities because of the
appearance as a male as well as being excluded from the male facility in
light of their biological sex, which would effectively exclude a trans man in
such a situation from work unless there were other single user facilities
that existed or were to be constructed.
802. The outcomes that flow from the claimant’s argument are in our view not
consistent with the Supreme Court decision being workable. We
appreciate that there is a practical distinction between permission to enter
a changing room for maintenance or cleaning on a particular occasion,
and to do so more generally in order to use it to change clothes, but that
distinction does not appear from the terms of the Act itself.
803. Sixthly after addressing the dilemma faced by a trans woman “who
presents fully as a woman” the decision states that
“such women may in practice choose to use female-only facilities
in a way which does not in fact compromise the privacy and dignity
of other women users…..”
804. That is we consider contrary to the construction argued for by the claimant,
which is that trans women do not have any choice in that regard – they
cannot use the female facility. That comment suggests to us that, if this be
appropriate, the trans woman using female-only facilities may be lawful
under the Act, although the trans woman does not have any absolute right

4104864/2024 Page 186
to do so. That phrase suggested in our view that the privacy and dignity of
other women users was a factor to take into account but not an absolute
bar to its use.
805. Seventhly and somewhat similarly to the previous point, the court referred
to Croft, in which the Court of Appeal held that there could be
circumstances under which a trans woman might in effect be treated as a
woman and we inferred from the comments that a trans woman can be
permitted to use a place such as a female changing room in principle –
dependent on circumstances as we address below - and that decision was
not adversely commented upon in any way by the Supreme Court. It is not
consistent with the claimant’s argument. The phraseology does require
amendment in light of FWS as we address below, but in our view the
principle remains valid.
806. Eighthly even if the view is taken that the terms of Schedule 3 are relevant
to determining issues arising under Part 5, which is not the view we hold
for reasons we address in the section following, the court did not speak in
terms that were mandatory, but rather were permissive. The Court made
the following comments, under the heading of separate and single-sex
services, to which we have added our own emphases by underlining them:
“[in relation to the exemptions in Schedule 3] some of these permit
what would otherwise constitute gender reassignment
discrimination but make no similar provision for persons issued with
a full GRC. Other provisions permit carve-outs from what would
otherwise constitute sex discrimination under the EA 2010. In
enacting these exemptions, the intention must have been to allow
for the exclusion of those with the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment, regardless of the possession of a GRC, in order to
maintain the provision of single or separate services for women and
men as distinct groups in appropriate circumstances……..
In enacting these exemptions, the intention must have been to
allow for the exclusion of those with the protected characteristic of
gender reassignment, regardless of the possession of a GRC, in
order to maintain the provision of single or separate services for
women and men as distinct groups in appropriate circumstances.
These provisions are directed at maintaining the availability of
separate or single spaces or services for women (or men) as a
group – for example changing rooms, homeless hostels,
segregated swimming areas (that might be essential for religious
reasons or desirable for the protection of a woman’s safety, or the
autonomy or privacy and dignity of the two sexes) or medical or
counselling services provided only to women (or men) – for
example cervical cancer screening for women or prostate cancer

4104864/2024 Page 187
screening for men, or counselling for women only as victims of rape
or domestic violence…….
The gateway conditions in paragraph 27(2) to (7) cannot be
coherently applied if sex does not carry its biological meaning
because it is hard to see how the condition in paragraph 27(2) (that
only persons of one sex have need of the particular service) can be
satisfied if each sex includes members of the opposite biological
sex in possession of a GRC and excludes members of the same
biological sex with a GRC. ……
While many women in a female-only changing room or on a
women-only hospital ward or in a rape counselling group might
reasonably object to the presence of biological males, it is difficult
to see how the reasonableness of such an objection could be
founded on possession or lack of a certificate. This is so especially
when the distinction does not track physical appearance or
presentation, and the woman is unlikely to have any information
about the GRC at the point at which her objection might be raised.
A trans woman with a GRC who presents fully as a woman may
feel she is more likely to prompt objections from other users if she
enters the men’s changing room or other facilities than if she uses
the women’s changing room or facilities. But in facing that dilemma
she is in the same position as a trans woman without a GRC.
Although such trans women may in practice choose to use female-
only facilities in a way which does not in fact compromise the
privacy and dignity of the other women users, the Scottish Ministers
do not suggest that a trans woman without a GRC is legally entitled
to do so............
The references in this paragraph only make sense as references to
biological sex. Provided it is proportionate, paragraph 28 exempts
gender reassignment discrimination but only in the context of the
provision of separate services for men and women or single
services to one sex…….
Nor is the EHRC correct to assert that paragraph 28 is redundant
on a biological interpretation of sex. On the contrary, if sex means
biological sex, then provided it is proportionate, the female only
nature of the service would engage paragraph 27 and would permit
the exclusion of all males including males living in the female
gender regardless of GRC status. Moreover, women living in the
male gender could also be excluded under paragraph 28 without
this amounting to gender reassignment discrimination. This might
be considered proportionate where reasonable objection is taken
to their presence, for example, because the gender reassignment
process has given them a masculine appearance or attributes to

4104864/2024 Page 188
which reasonable objection might be taken in the context of the
women-only service being provided. Their exclusion would amount
to unlawful gender reassignment discrimination not sex
discrimination absent this exception.”
807. The reference to the reasonableness of an objection would have been
otiose, as whether someone objected or not would not be a question of
reasonableness, but would be an entitlement of the person objecting. The
use of the word reasonableness indicates that there is a test to apply
beyond that of what the biological sex is.
808. What is perhaps the clearest example of the inconsistency relevant to the
circumstances of the present case is paragraph 213. It states:
“If sex has its biological meaning in this paragraph [26 in Schedule
3] then a service-provider can separate male and female users as
obvious and distinct groups. For example, a homeless shelter could
have separate hostels for men and women provided this pursued a
legitimate aim, which might be the safety and security of women
users of their privacy and dignity (and the same for male users). By
contrast, if sex means certificated sex, the service provider would
have to allow access to trans women with a GRC (in other words
biological males who are female according to section 9(1)), to the
women’s hostel.”
809. These comments are in our view directly contrary to the construction
argued for by the claimant. The words “provided this pursued a legitimate
aim” would not have been added if the claimant’s position were accurate
(on the hypothesis above). Those words are consistent with an ability to
decide what to do and the need to apply a test of objective justification to
that decision, not that there is a mandated answer in the context of a single
sex space. If the claimant’s argument was right we would have expected
the Supreme Court to have said in terms that as sex has a biological
meaning, men and women had to be separated in relation to such a space,
access being refused other than to the facility aligning with biological sex.
810. Ninthly there are other instances of the appellate courts and tribunals
seeking to find a solution where two different characteristics are relied on
and are in some form of conflict, as we shall come to, such as to point
away from having one single answer. The Supreme Court referred to
those cases in paragraph 151, in which it stated that the Act:
“seeks to strike a balance between the rights of one group and
another, rights that can conflict with or contradict one another in
some circumstances. An obvious example of such conflict emerges
in employment cases concerning the protected characteristic of
religion or belief on the one hand and sexual orientation on the

4104864/2024 Page 189
other; see for example Islington London Borough Council v
Ladele [200] EWCA Civ 1357…..”.
811. Lastly on this matter, we make some additional points for completeness.
Paragraph 260 of FWS referred to persons being protected by section 19
where the protected characteristic was gender reassignment, and a PCP
based on the claimant’s argument, which would have the ffect of excluding
trans persons from both male and female changing rooms, is clearly liable
to amount to indirect discrimination, which is likely to be very hard indeed
to justify as proportionate, and if the trans person were to be told not to
use any single sex space where there are no other alternatives that may,
depending on the view taken of causation, be direct discrimination which
cannot be justified.
812. Such a construction of the decision as the claimant argues for would in
our view be likely (in at least some cases, although not in our view the
present case) to put the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under
the Convention, in light of the case law of the ECtHR to which we referred
above, and a construction of the decision that does so should be if
possible avoided. That is a useful cross check in our view. Indeed doing
so may be required under the 1998 Act in such cases. It is similarly
inconsistent with the obligations arising as assimilated law, having regard
to the CJEU authorities and those of the House of Lords and Supreme
Court referred to above.
813. It would mean that the circumstances of those trans persons who have
had medical treatment and surgery to align their bodies as closely as
practicable to that of the sex or gender they identify as having could be
excluded from any facility. That would in practical terms in many cases
mean that the person could not continue to be employed, or only be able
to do so by using facilities outwith the workplace, where the same issues
are liable to arise albeit within a different statutory framework under Part
3. A construction which, particularly in the context of work, permits a
discretion to be exercised to balance the differing protected
characteristics, human rights, and rights under assimilated law of those
concerned, as we address further below, is in our view to be preferred so
that there is not a contravention of human rights in particular. Again we
consider that to be a useful cross check.
814. Although the position of the second respondent was on the evidence not
the same as those who are intersex or with differences of sexual
development, we consider that the conclusion we have reached is
supported by the position of someone who is, such as in broadly the same
circumstances of Sempill-Forbes. If such a person having been assigned
female at birth considers in later life their gender and sex to be male,
presents as male, and has a body consistent with that of a male to the
extent of the evidence in that case, it appears to us to be very likely to be

4104864/2024 Page 190
a breach of the UK’s obligations under the Convention and not consistent
with assimilated law were that person to be excluded from both male
facilities because of biological sex, and female facilities because of the
presentation as a male. The conclusion we have reached allows for the
management of such complex and difficult cases by allowing that person
to use the male changing room, provided that that is done in an objectively
proportionate manner against tests we shall address below. These cases
are very rare indeed, but a construction that permits an answer to them
not in breach of human rights is we consider once again a useful cross-
check.
815. The claimant’s argument included that the protected characteristic of
gender reassignment would not be engaged unless the second
respondent established a positive right in law to use the changing room,
which the claimant argued did not exist. That argument goes too far in our
view, as it appeared to us to be based on an argument that there required
to be some form of statutory authority for the permission granted, which
we considered is not correct. The second respondent did have the right in
law from being given permission, the reason for that permission was the
protected characteristic of gender reassignment, and the question is
whether that was or was not in breach of the Act. The claimant was in
effect seeking to ignore the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment. That was consistent with her argument that the first
respondent’s position on how trans persons should be treated was
delusional.
816. The first respondent could not ignore the protected characteristic of
gender reassignment held by the second respondent without risk of
breach of the Act at least under section 26 and possibly others. In light of
the terms of the Act, and the case law on the protections given to those
who are trans persons from the ECtHR and CJEU or its predecessor,
consideration does require to be given to how to decide where a trans
person should change clothing, or which toilet facility to use. Whether the
first respondent made a lawful decision or not in the circumstances is a
separate question we address below.
817. In relation to human rights the claimant founded on R (on the application
of James (Dowsett) v Secretary of State for Justice 2013 EWHC 687
(Admin) referred to above, after asserting that Article 8 protects an
individual’s interest in bodily privacy and the bodily autonomy and dignity
interests that that entails. It asserted that authorities recognise that women
have a particular interest in asserting the right to bodily privacy as against
the opposite sex.
818. Dowsett is a decision of the High Court, and not binding on this Tribunal.
It was also a decision on section 29 and Part 3, which this Tribunal does
not have jurisdiction over, as addressed above. The circumstances of a

4104864/2024 Page 191
prison where searches of the person are undertaken are entirely different
to those in this case. The setting of this case is both legally (by virtue of
Part 5) and factually (two employees at a workplace) materially different
such that we did not consider that the case supported the claimant’s
argument.
819. The claimant also argued that biological sex is real, but this is not the
question before us. It is more of a political argument than one under the
2010 Act. The definition of sex under section 11 has been clarified by the
Supreme Court. It is sufficient for this case that the sex of the second
respondent is that assigned at birth, and is male. What sex there is for
other purposes or in other contexts where the facts may be materially
different, such as in Sempill-Forbes, is not directly relevant to the issues
we face, and only is useful as a means of cross checking matters. Gender
reassignment is a protected characteristic such that those with it have
protections in law independent of their biological sex. That has arisen from
the development of the law in that regard, as set out above. How an
employer is to decide an issue where two employees each have conflicting
protected characteristics we address below.
820. In summary we rejected the claimant’s argument. The Supreme Court’s
decision has the conclusion that a trans woman is not a woman for the
purposes of sex under section 11. For a question of which changing room
to use that is not in our view determinative. The protected characteristic of
gender reassignment is not to be wholly disregarded as it is of equal status
to sex (as are the respective beliefs of the claimant and second
respondent). It may be lawful to grant permission to a trans person to use
the changing room that aligns with the sex and gender they identify as
having, dependent on the circumstances. Whether or not it was in relation
to the second respondent, and how that is to be determined, are separate
points which we address below.
(ii) The distinction between public services and work under the Act
821. The provisions in the Act applicable to a workplace, being those material
to the case before us, are substantially different from those applicable to
the provision of public services, and the Supreme Court was we consider
obviously aware of the distinction between these sets of provisions. It
made explicit its being aware that the provisions in Schedule 3, which
qualified the terms of section 29 in Part 3, were applicable only to Part 3
(and not section 39 in Part 5 relevant to work), by its examination of the
structure of the Act, and the roles of its different parts. It was made clear
from its comments that:
“The EA is arranged over 16 parts and 28 schedules…….

4104864/2024 Page 192
Part 3 of the EA 2010 regulates the provision of services and public
functions, and we have set out above the terms of the prohibition in
section 29 (making it unlawful, among other things, to discriminate
in the provision of a service or the exercise of a public function).
Schedule 3 contains exemptions from this general prohibition. As
we shall explain, some of these permit what would otherwise
constitute gender reassignment discrimination but make no similar
provision for persons issued with a full GRC…..
Part 5 (see also Schedules 6,7,8,and 9) makes it unlawful to
discriminate against, harass or victimise a person at work or in
some forms of employment….
Part 14 (see also Schedules 22 and 23) establishes exceptions to
certain prohibitions in the earlier Parts [one of which is Part 5].”
822. The series of exceptions to section 29 provided for in Schedule 3 (amongst
others) which the court addresses in detail include provisions for single
sex services in paragraphs 26 - 28. There is specific reference to single
sex spaces in paragraph 211 of the Supreme Court judgment in that
context, which included that “These provisions are directed at maintaining
the availability of separate or single sex spaces for women (or men) as a
group – for example changing rooms…...”
823. There are exceptions to the provisions in Part 5 in a number of Schedules.
Schedules 6 - 9 do so but are not we considered possibly of relevance to
the issues in this case. Schedules 22 and 23 also do so. They have effect
for Part 5 by sections 191 and 196 respectively. Their terms are
substantially different to those found in Schedule 3. There is nothing in
them similar to paragraphs 26 – 28 of Schedule 3 in our view.
824. The Supreme Court referred to Schedule 23 in its decision. That Schedule
applies to both Parts 3 and 5, but the provisions as to communal
accommodation in the Schedule do not have any application to the facts
of the case before us. The changing room was no part of any communal
accommodation from the evidence we heard. We did not therefore
consider the terms of Schedule 23 to be of relevance to the case before
us.
825. Schedule 22, which the Supreme Court did not specifically refer to save
by its reference to Part 14, contains exceptions relevant to Part 5 and to
other Parts. It consists of two parts. The first part is headed “Statutory
authority” and is in relation to compliance with statutory duty. It is subject
to the provisions that the Schedule sets out for certain protected
characteristics. But the first part does not provide for an exception in the
context of work where the protected characteristic is sex, or to that of
gender reassignment at all. We did not consider therefore that the first part

4104864/2024 Page 193
of Schedule 22 provides any exception to the protections for those with
the protected characteristic of gender reassignment, nor any additional
exception relevant to those with the protected characteristic of sex
applicable to work in Part 5, that could be relevant to the case before us.
Schedule 22 we concluded is not relevant to the case before us.
826. The second part of the Schedule is headed “Protection of women” and
includes provisions related to risks specifically affecting women, as is
there defined. The claimant argued that the 1992 Regulations fell within
that category, but in our view there is nothing to indicate that the
Regulations founded on, being Regulations 20 and 24, were made to
address risks specifically affecting women. Those Regulations both apply
to facilities for men and women, with no differentiator between the sexes.
827. The general provision in Schedule 22 as to risks specifically affecting
women follows that in relation to pregnancy or maternity, and the word
“any other circumstances” appears before “giving rise to risks”. We do not
consider that provision for changing rooms for females and males fell
within that definition. Regulation 24 refers specifically to “reasons of
propriety” which in our view is not a term consistent with risks.
828. In summary in our view the 1992 Regulations do not fall within the terms
of the second part of Schedule 22 as they are not made for the protection
of women within the terms of that Schedule. We concluded that Schedule
22 is also not relevant to the case before us.
829. In any event even if contrary to our view it were to be considered relevant
we did not read Schedule 22 as requiring, as opposed to permitting, the
first respondent not to allow a person male by sex to use the female
changing room. In our view, on this hypothesis, the second part rendered
lawful under the Act what otherwise may be a breach of one of the
provisions in the event that the first respondent decided to exclude trans
women from a single-sex space because it considered that it had a duty
to do so under the 1992 Regulations. The first respondent did not so
decide. On the hypothesis therefore the second part was not engaged. We
therefore concluded that Schedule 23 was not relevant to the case before
us.
830. We further considered that Parts 3 and 5 of the Act are to be construed
independently from each other and that this is made clear from the terms
of section 32(2) which states that Part 3 does not apply to discrimination,
harassment or victimisation prohibited by Part 5. The provisions in the two
Parts are we considered mutually exclusive in this regard.
831. That mutual exclusivity is also found in the provisions for enforcement
which are separated between civil courts for Part 3 found in section 114
and Employment Tribunals for Part 5 found in section 120. Section 114 is
why FWS was commenced in the Outer House. If an issue as to public

4104864/2024 Page 194
services arises it cannot be litigated in the Employment Tribunal, but only
the civil courts, and if an issue as to work arises it cannot be litigated in
the civil courts, only the Employment Tribunal.
832. These distinctions between how public services and work have
respectively been treated are in our view important. Parliament could have
made specific provision to have effect for single sex spaces at work such
as changing rooms and toilets in Part 5 had it wished to, either by similar
terms to those in paragraphs 26 – 28 of Schedule 3, doing so within
Schedule 22 or otherwise, but it did not. It could also have provided
specifically for the protected characteristic of sex in the context of work,
and of gender reassignment more widely, as exceptions in Schedule 22,
but did not. Given the structure of the Act with its separate Parts and
independent provisions for jurisdiction it is we consider clear that that
difference of treatment for such spaces between work and public services
was the Parliamentary intention.
833. We considered that it is clear that the Supreme Court was aware of these
distinctions between provisions relevant to Parts 3 and 5 respectively from
other paragraphs of its decision in addition to the references above, for
example paragraphs 114, 118, 120, 180 and 185.
834. This analysis of the Act was we considered a further reason why the
claimant’s argument so far as founded on FWS was not correct.
Analysis of the respondent’s argument
835. The argument for the respondents was, in essence, that once a person
has the protected characteristic of gender reassignment it is necessarily
lawful to regard that person as having the sex they identify as having, in
this case female, and allow access to facilities such as the changing room
on that basis. They sought support for their position from the terms of the
CoP: Services on which the decision to grant permission was based. We
did not consider that argument to be correct in law.
836. Whilst the respondents argued before us that biological sex was not
defined in the decision, the meaning of that term was explained by the
Supreme Court as follows:
“We also use the expression “biological sex” which is used widely,
including in the judgments of the Court of Session, to describe the
sex of a person at birth.”
837. Reading the decision as a whole, we considered that that is a reference in
practical terms to the sex as determined on the birth certificate issued
shortly after birth. In light of our analysis of FWS above we did not consider
that it was necessarily lawful to grant permission to someone with the

4104864/2024 Page 195
protected characteristic of gender reassignment to use the changing room
of the sex or gender they identify as having.
838. We have addressed above the structure of the Act and the provisions that
are applicable to work relevant to the case before us. The claim in this
case is in relation to use of a changing room which was for staff only, as
the sign provided on the door to enter it stated. It was in an area of the
department to which staff had access only by means of a card. It was not
open to or used by the public. If it had been an issue of service to the
public that would not have been within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to
determine in any event.
839. In the context of work as discussed above there is no specific statutory
provision in the Act directing employers and employees (as defined in the
Act) on their use, or providing an exception to discrimination or
harassment on the protected characteristics of sex or gender
reassignment, and we concluded from that distinction that Parliament
intended that changing rooms and toilets should be treated differently in
the context of work to the context of public services. Schedule 3 and the
CoP:Services are not a basis on which it is we considered competent to
decide the issues in this case, which arise solely under Part 5. The
CoP:Services was produced by the EHRC, as its terms make clear, under
and solely for the purposes of Part 3 of the Act and in our view has no
relevance to Part 5.
840. We therefore did not accept the respondents’ argument that the decision
was lawful as it was based on the CoP: Services. The respondents’
submission in any event misunderstood what the Code said, and the terms
of the paragraph relied on, even if it were to be relevant, contrary to our
view. The pleadings for the respondents did not quote the full terms of the
paragraph in question, only its initial part and not that starting “However”
or those which followed it. It did not take account of that part which referred
to “normally” subject to “unless there are strong reasons to the contrary.”
That part of the Code did not therefore provide for only one answer as to
how a trans person should be treated.
841. A Code is in any event not to be equated to the terms of the Act, but to be
taken into account if the Tribunal considers it appropriate to do so. We did
not consider that the CoP:Services was appropriate to take into account
in this case. In our view the answer to the issues in the case must be found
from the terms of the Act, applying the principles of statutory interpretation
and the case law relevant to it. Account can also be taken of the Code of
Practice: Employment which was made under Part 5, although its terms
do not in our view provide any assistance to the issue before us.
842. The respondents also sought to argue that where the Supreme Court
decision was not binding we could apply instead the definition of a woman
in A v Chief Constable which addressed the Sex Discrimination Act

4104864/2024 Page 196
1975. We did not consider that could be right as the decision is clearly
binding on us as to the definition of woman under the Act. But even if it
were not the 1975 Act was repealed. In some respects it was replaced
with the 2010 Act but that latter Act included reform of the provisions on
discrimination not merely their restatement, and brought within one statute
other protected characteristics. There have been material changes to the
relevant provisions even within the context of discrimination on grounds of
sex. The Supreme Court considered the construction of the 2010 Act as a
whole, and the terms of that Act are, obviously, entirely different from the
terms of the 1975 Act. The definition of woman in that case from the 1975
Act does not we consider survive the passing of the 2010 Act.
843. The respondents also referred to three cases at the CJEU or its
predecessor being KB, Richards and MB. But the factual and legal
context of each of those cases is entirely different to that before us. They
do not address the circumstances of the present case, where there was
no evidence of surgery or medical treatment to align physiological aspects
of sex with those of the desired sex, for example. The respondents state
in their principal written submission that “it is acknowledged that there is a
potential tension between those authorities and FWS”. But that is not the
position in this case and, even if it was, it is not in our view competent for
an Employment Tribunal to ignore the Supreme Court decision on the
construction of a statute on the basis that it might be said to an extent to
conflict with those CJEU authorities as assimilated law, or human rights
provisions. So far as the 2010 Act is concerned, we required to construe
it as to the meaning of the terms set out above on the basis of the Supreme
Court decision as a matter of judicial precedent.
844. The respondents’ submission referred to those who are intersex, and
referred both to Elan-Crane and Semenya v Switzerland (Application
N. 109431/21), but as has been referred to above there was no suggestion
in the evidence that that was the circumstance of the second respondent.
They can be used as a cross reference only in our view. At paragraphs 52
– 53 of their final written submission they seek to refer to matters that were
not raised in evidence, and we did not consider that it was competent to
do so. In our view we can consider aspects beyond the facts of this case
again as a form of cross check for statutory construction, but not beyond
that.
845. The rhetorical question was asked by the respondents: how can enforcing
the binary position on sex be policed? The Supreme Court has given its
answer, which is that one applies the sex on the birth certificate issued
shortly after birth. In any event it is not for us to question the effectiveness
of the terms of a statute, or their desirability in more general terms. Those
are matters for the Legislature, not for us. We address below how to
resolve a conflict between protected characteristics.

4104864/2024 Page 197
846. The respondents separately argued that there are nuances as to sex, that
there is no definition of what biological sex means, and that there are some
with intersex of other conditions of unusual chromosomes. In addition
there was some evidence led before us on matters of biology. Dr Searle
gave evidence that not all persons have either XX or XY chromosomes,
and about differences of sexual development. Dr Currer gave more
detailed evidence to similar effect, but agreed that sex was binary. As a
question of biology it may be unduly simplistic to say that every human
being is either male or female, although the incidence of those without
what may be termed a standard chromosomal presentation is from the
evidence we heard of the order of up to around 0.3%.
847. But whatever may be the position in biology, which may be relevant in
other legal contexts, we cannot disapply the conclusion of the Supreme
Court on the meaning of a term in the Act, which is binding on us, and
there was in any event no evidence that the second respondent was
someone who had non-typical chromosomes or physiology.
848. Issues of biology were addressed in Bellinger, in the quotations in the
Appendix, which included that from Lord Hope to the effect that sex cannot
be changed, which are comments the Supreme Court will have been
aware of and which are contradictory to the respondent’s argument in this
respect, which is a further if unnecessary reason to reject it.
849. The respondents also argued that the sex of the second respondent is
male “unless she is perceived as a woman”, but the claimant did not
perceive the claimant as a woman, nor was that (entirely sensibly) raised
in cross examination of her. It had not been pled by the respondents.
There was no evidence as to the second respondent being perceived as
a woman being the reason for the permission given. It is not we consider
an argument open in submission as it has no evidential basis, or in the
pleaded case.
850. Although we were provided by the respondents with materials which
included what appeared to us to be criticism of some aspects at least of
the Supreme Court decision, and by the claimant with commentary on the
1992 Regulations from an IDS publication, were we consider of no
assistance to us. These materials are not authority, and we are bound by
the Supreme Court decision given the doctrine of judicial precedent. The
argument for TransLucent to the effect that FWS was wrongly decided we
also reject as not being a finding we are entitled to make.
851. We did not accordingly accept these arguments for the respondents, or
the submission by TransLucent.

4104864/2024 Page 198
Summary
852. In our view the parties had approached matters on a misconception of
rights. Both the claimant and second respondent founded on the protected
characteristics they each held, as well as their own human rights, and it is
understandable that each concentrated on their view of the rights they had
as an individual. But all individuals have human rights, the claimant and
second respondent each had protected characteristics, and each
appeared not to consider the human rights or protected characteristics of
the other, or at least did so insufficiently. Where these rights and
characteristics come into conflict it is incumbent on each person, and in
this regard also the first respondent as employer of both, to have regard
to the rights of the other person. It may be difficult to do so where beliefs
may be polarised and in opposition to each other but that is precisely the
circumstance when consideration of the fact that each individual has
human rights is in our view what the law requires.
853. We therefore considered that the claimant’s argument was wrong partly
as it failed to take account of the protected characteristics that the second
respondent held, and the human rights of the second respondent, and that
the respondents’ argument was wrong partly as it failed to take account of
the protected characteristics that the claimant held, and her human rights.
In each case the human rights position is effectively the same in relation
to the respective rights of the claimant and second respondent under
assimilated law.
854. We concluded that it is potentially but not necessarily lawful under the Act
to permit a trans woman to use a female only space, such as the changing
room, in the context of work. We considered that the construction of the
Act in light of the Supreme Court decision relevant to this case was that
the claimant can argue both before an employer and at the Tribunal the
claims of direct and indirect discrimination and of harassment as she has
made in this claim if a trans woman is granted permission to use the
female changing room, but also that the second respondent can make
arguments both before an employer and at the Tribunal of indirect
discrimination and harassment if excluded from that same changing room.
How an employer may attempt to resolve these competing arguments and
the protected characteristics on which they are based we address below.
The 1992 Regulations
855. The claimant accepted that the Tribunal does not have any jurisdiction to
determine an issue under the 1992 Regulations but argued in effect that
they were an aid to the construction of the 2010 Act, and required the first
respondent not to give the permission it had to the second respondent.
856. The 1992 Regulations confer criminal liability if breached. Following the
passing of the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act 2013 the 1992

4104864/2024 Page 199
Regulations do not confer civil liability unless a particular statutory
provision is enacted to do so. Section 69 of that Act provides as follows:
“69 Civil liability for breach of health and safety duties
(1) Section 47 of the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 (civil
liability) is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (7).
(2) In subsection (1), omit paragraph (b) (including the “or” at the
end of that paragraph).
(3) For subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) Breach of a duty imposed by a statutory instrument containing
(whether alone or with other provision) health and safety
regulations shall not be actionable except to the extent that
regulations under this section so provide.
(2A) Breach of a duty imposed by an existing statutory provision
shall not be actionable except to the extent that regulations under
this section so provide (including by modifying any of the existing
statutory provisions)……”
857. The parties did not make submissions on this matter, but we have not
found any statutory provision relevant to the 1992 Regulations conferring
civil liability for a breach. We concluded that the 1992 Regulations do not
confer any civil right in law on any person, and are purely criminal in
nature. We do not consider that the claimant was right to argue before us
that she has a right under the 1992 Regulations to a single sex space
accordingly.
858. In our view the claimant’s attempts to persuade us that the Regulations
required a single sex space from which all biological males required to be
excluded because the definitions in FWS should be read across to the
1992 Regulations went beyond an issue we are able to determine, as it is
a matter arising only under the criminal law.
859. The 1992 Regulations do not have a definition of men or women. FWS
does not determine the meaning of words in the 1992 Regulations. As
stated above its analysis of the meaning of words such as “woman” was
specifically confined to the 2010 Act itself. The terms of that decision
therefore contradict the claimant’s argument.
860. There are arguments both for and against the claimant’s position that the
same approach should be followed, and for and against the respondents’
position that a definition of women which is inclusive of those who are
trans women is appropriate in order to construe the 1992 Regulations
consistently with Article 8. In our view these arguments are not ones that
we can competently address.
861. The claimant founded on the ability of a Tribunal to determine contractual
issues. That was as we understood it a reference to Cleeve Link Ltd v
Bryla [2014] ICR 264, in which the EAT held that a Tribunal could consider

4104864/2024 Page 200
and apply ordinary contract law principles. The context of that case was
one for unlawful deductions from wages where the claimant argued that
the term relied on by the employer to make the deduction was an
unenforceable penalty clause. That is an entirely different context, in our
view, to the case before us. There is a substantial difference between
applying ordinary principles of the law of contract to such a claim where
jurisdiction is conferred by the Employment Rights Act 1996 and seeking
to define a term in the 1992 Regulations so as to determine whether or not
the first respondent’s grant of permission to the second respondent to use
the changing room amounted to a criminal offence.
862. It must be a matter for the Procurator Fiscal, the police or HSE if desired,
in the first instance as to whether or not to commence a criminal
investigation should a complaint be made, then for the Procurator Fiscal
to decide whether to commence a prosecution, and then for a Sheriff to
decide if there has been a breach of the law if a prosecution is
commenced.
863. An Employment Judge is not appointed to that role, and has not been
authorised by any statutory provision to take such a decision. It is a
decision taken by Sheriff who does have that authority, who also sits alone
and not, as with this Tribunal, including lay members. In our view it is not
simply outside our jurisdiction to decide whether the 1992 Regulations
were breached or not, but also beyond our competence as a statutory
body appointed for entirely different purposes. The position is entirely
different to that where an employer considers that it does require to act in
order to comply with a statutory duty, such as that in the 1992 Regulations,
and relies on Schedule 22 as a defence to a claim. In that different context
we would have jurisdiction to the extent of determining whether the
employer’s view was genuinely held, but that is both a different question
to the one raised by the claimant’s argument and not the factual context
before us.
864. In summary we did not consider that the 1992 Regulations were of any
assistance in determining the claims before us, and we rejected the
claimant’s arguments on the basis of them.
A “sex-based rule”
865. The claimant also argued that there was a “sex-based rule” from the sign
on the door of the changing room which stated “female staff only”. She
submitted that that was required not only by the 1992 Regulations, but
also because it was something that the first respondent had provided only
for its female staff. The claimant’s argument in that respect we did not
accept. The only basis for it we consider there could be under the Act is
as a PCP, and the two PCPs in the case have been identified. Otherwise
what is provided, to whom and in what circumstances, and whether that
created reasonable expectations or otherwise, are all questions of fact to

4104864/2024 Page 201
be determined so far as relevant to the sections of the Act relied upon.
None of them, or the other provisions relevant to them, are a basis for an
argument of there being a sex based rule as is contended, in our view.
866. The facility was provided for staff, and had the sign referred to. What was
not clear was whether that sign was intended to be female by biological
sex, or by gender, or by also including those who identified as female and
had the protected characteristic of gender reassignment on which basis
they were permitted to use it by the first respondent. In practice the sign
was treated as one including gender reassignment, as the first respondent
fairly shortly after the second respondent started working at the
department gave permission to the second respondent to use it, which
was not unlawful save for a specific period as we shall come to. We did
not consider that a sign on a door created any rule under the 2010 Act or
otherwise that only biological women could use it, and we rejected the
claimant’s argument on that.
The parties’ respective beliefs
867. The EAT held in Forstater that what are generally referred to as gender
critical beliefs, which are also referred to as sex realist beliefs, fall within
the terms of section 10. The decision also sets out in general terms the
context in which decisions such as those we take is undertaken, which
includes the following:
“We wish to make clear at the outset that it is not the role of this
Employment Appeal Tribunal to express any view as to the merits
of either side of that debate (which we shall refer to as the
“transgender debate”); its role is simply to determine whether, in
reaching the conclusion that it did, the Tribunal erred in law. Our
judgment should not therefore be read as providing support for or
diminishing the views of either side in that debate.
In taking that approach, we do not in any way seek to ignore or
downplay the difficulties faced by trans persons seeking merely to
live their lives peacefully in the gender with which they identify,
irrespective of their natal sex. The regrettable reality for many trans
persons, however, is that something which most take for granted -
the sense of self and autonomy in identity – is under constant
challenge and attack.
[There was then a quotation from the Equal Treatment Bench Book]
The vulnerability of many trans persons is something we bear very
much in mind. “
868. Forstater was followed by the EAT in Mackereth v Department for Work
and Pensions [2022] ICR 1609 in which, after an extensive review of
authority, it was held that a belief in the truth of Genesis 1:27, that a person

4104864/2024 Page 202
cannot change their sex or gender at will and attempting to do so is
pointless, self-destructive and sinful, and a belief that it would be
irresponsible and dishonest for a health professional to accommodate or
encourage a patient's 'impersonation' of the opposite sex, both qualified
for protection. The EAT also held that in assessing whether a belief is
worthy of respect in a democratic society, not incompatible with human
dignity, and not in conflict with the fundamental rights of others, it is wrong
to take account of the circumstances of the claimant's employment and
whether making statements while at work in accordance with the belief
might amount to discrimination against, or harassment of, others.
869. In Thomas v Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS Foundation Trust
and Brett [2024] IRLR 938, the EAT considered case law from the ECtHR
and suggested that it is possible that a belief might not be protected under
the Equality Act 2010 even if it fell short of the Forstater standard of
pursuing totalitarianism, or advocating Nazism, or espousing violence and
hatred in the gravest of forms, if the belief espoused intolerance or
discrimination. This would be because such beliefs might, according to
some of the ECtHR case law, also offend against article 17 of the
Convention and lie outside its protection.
870. In both Forstater and Thomas the EAT held that a belief being a
protected characteristic under section 10 is not conclusive, as the
manifestation of beliefs can be restricted under articles 9(2) and 10(2) and
thus restrictions on what people say at work may be justified indirect
discrimination. Saying things which reflect the speaker's belief, an
example of which being 'misgendering' someone, could amount to
harassment of that person as a holder of such a belief is subject to the
same prohibitions on discrimination, victimisation and harassment under
the Act as all others. The fact that the act of misgendering was a
manifestation of a protected belief would not operate automatically to
amount to a defence. In Forstater the then President added that the
harassment claim might be based on one or more grounds including a
philosophical belief that gender identity is paramount and that a trans
woman is woman.
871. The claimant’s gender critical or sex realist belief is therefore one that is
protected under the Act, and one that she is entitled to hold as a matter of
her human rights, but where the manifestation of that belief can be
restricted dependent on the circumstances. She is entitled to believe that
a trans woman is a man, and that that is all that matters (which is what we
understood her belief to be). It is protected notwithstanding that it is not
consistent with the authorities from the courts both domestic and
European with regard to the rights of trans persons, and the bringing into
effect in UK law of protections for trans persons.

4104864/2024 Page 203
872. FWS also held that those with the protected characteristic of gender re-
assignment retained the protections against discrimination or harassment
in the 2010 Act, specifically referring to paragraphs 103 and 104 of
Forstater and the possibility but not certainty that “refusing to refer to a
trans person by their preferred pronoun …could amount to unlawful
harassment in some circumstances”. That clarified that the fact of
misgendering may or may not be harassment, and whether it is in breach
of section 26 will be dependent on all the circumstances.
873. Applying the guidance in Forstater and the cases cited therein, it
appeared to us that the belief held by the second respondent, that the
second respondent’s gender and sex are female, is protected
notwithstanding that the Supreme Court held that sex under section 11 is
biological. We considered that it would not be logical to protect the
claimant’s gender critical belief, but not that of the second respondent. In
short, although the beliefs of each of the claimant and second respondent
are not consistent with how the law determines sex and gender
reassignment respectively the law also protects those beliefs in a qualified
manner.
874. We concluded that the beliefs held by the claimant and the second
respondent respectively are therefore protected in law under section 10.
Each is entitled to respect, and each is to be considered in the context of
their human rights.
The protected characteristic of gender reassignment
875. Although the protected characteristic is termed “gender reassignment”,
gender is not defined in the Act, and is not itself a protected characteristic.
The concept of gender is explained in Elan-Crane. Unlike sex gender is
not binary, and some people do not regard themselves as either male or
female by gender with the claimant in that case being an example of
someone who regards their gender as non-binary. The second respondent
considers the gender held to be female, and is entitled to believe that. The
claimant’s argument is that gender is irrelevant to the issues in this case,
but that is not easy to square with how the PCP2 for the indirect
discrimination claim is framed, a matter addressed below. In any event the
focus in this regard is on the protected characteristic.
876. Gender re-assignment is a protected characteristic which is different to
and distinct from that of sex under the Act, as the Supreme Court made
clear in FWS when stating that “there is no conflation of these separate
characteristics”. Section 7 defines gender re-assignment by reference to
a process which has “the purpose of reassigning the person’s sex by
changing physiological or other attributes of sex.” What are the
physiological or other attributes of sex is not defined. The section in this
regard however uses the word “sex” and not “gender”.

4104864/2024 Page 204
877. The foundation of the protected characteristic of gender reassignment is
the process of transition to the sex into which the person seeks to be
reassigned. That is in the context, again as addressed by the Supreme
Court, that the person’s “biological sex may continue to be readily
perceivable” with it being possible that there is “no change in outward
appearance.” That the Supreme Court used the word “may” indicates that
not always will biological sex be readily perceivable. That is also a matter
addressed in other authorities, including Supreme Court ones such as
West Yorkshire.
878. As a result of the terms physiological and non-physiological attributes of
sex not being defined in the Act we considered it at least helpful, if not
necessary, to making findings in fact about what they were. We have done
so partly from the evidence heard where that was accepted, and partly
where considered necessary and appropriate to do so on the basis of
judicial knowledge. There is an obvious danger in making what may be
regarded as somewhat sweeping generalisations on matters relating to
sex and gender in those findings, for example by referring to women
wearing dresses and men wearing trousers, or women having longer hair
than men, as non-physiological attributes of sex. The differences between
individuals can be endless, the differences of attitude between different
generations or circumstances can be very significant, and there are risks
in using stereotypical examples of the non-physiological attributes of sex
in particular. In light of the definition in section 7 however the Tribunal
considered it appropriate to proceed on at least some evidential basis in
order to address fully the issues arising in the case.
879. There is a degree of tension between someone’s sex, which is a matter of
biology assessed at birth, and therefore immutable under the 2010 Act as
held by the Supreme Court, and the basis of the protected characteristic
for those persons to whom section 7 applies. Gender reassignment is
where a process has the purpose of reassigning sex under that section
but in light of FWS that purpose cannot in law be achieved.
880. Section 7 must nevertheless be read in a manner that is consistent with
the Supreme Court decision. It appeared to us that section 7 must be
construed such that the word “purpose” should be read as if to mean
intended outcome, such that it aligns with the person’s belief referred to in
the previous section. If that fact is established, and one of the three
aspects of the process also established, the protected characteristic is
held by the person.
881. In cross examination and submissions the claimant raised a fictional
person “Pete”. Witnesses were asked what the position would be if that
person entered the changing room, refused to leave, and claimed to have
a female gender identity. The argument was essentially of a man using
the façade of gender reassignment for improper purposes, including for

4104864/2024 Page 205
sexual gratification or as a threat to women. As a matter of fact that is not
the position in the case before us, but we addressed it as it was a material
part of the claimant’s case, in particular it was argued that this fictional
person was legally indistinguishable from the second respondent. It was
therefore a cross check proposed by the claimant.
882. Who may fall within the definition of section 7 was addressed in R (AA
and others) v National Health Service Commissioning Board [2023]
EWHC 43 (Admin), (later upheld in the Court of Appeal [2023] EWCA Civ
902), in which the High Court considered that there are three important
aspects to the definition in section 7:
''First, … the process will not necessarily be a medical one. It may
involve changing non-physiological aspects of sex, such as one's
name and/or how one dresses, or wears one's hair, or speaks, or
acts.
Second, the reference to “a process (or any part of a process)”
reflects the fact that trans people will give effect to their gender
identity in a variety of ways. Some will embark on a process which
they intend will include hormone treatment and surgery, or other
forms of medical intervention—as well as changing some of the
non-physiological aspects of gender. But some may decide, on
reflection, that they only wish to make some of these changes.…
Third, the reference to those who are “proposing to undergo”, as
well as those who are undergoing or have undergone, this process
(or part of it) shows that Parliament intended the protection to start
before the process (or any part of it) has started. All that is required
is that they propose to undergo at least a part of such a process.
The word “proposing” connotes a conscious decision, which can
properly be described as settled, to adopt some aspect of the
identity of a gender different from that assigned at birth. A passing
whim will not do, but nor is an intention required that the change
should be permanent.'
883. That argument is we considered convincing. It is persuasive rather than
binding, but strongly so in our view, and suggests that the fictional Pete
may not be someone with that protected characteristic at all, as merely by
stating that the person identifies as female is insufficient. A passing whim
or disingenuous comment does not confer the protected characteristic of
gender reassignment. The decision suggests that there requires to be
some disclosed intention with at least a basic level of evidence to support
it. We respectfully agreed with the comments in that case and concluded
that there is a distinction in law between the fictional Pete and the second
respondent, or anyone having the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment. Pete does not have that protected characteristic in the

4104864/2024 Page 206
absence of a genuine intention within the section. The second respondent
does.
How is a conflict between protected characteristics to be determined
under the Act?
884. There is in the case before us a conflict between protected characteristics
held by two employees, none of which takes precedence over any other
per se. The first respondent as employer had to decide how to resolve that
conflict. The Act does not specifically provide any mechanism to do so.
We consider that there must be one in order for the Act to be workable, as
otherwise whatever the employer does can be held to be a breach of the
Act as we address further below. Only by ascertaining what that
mechanism is can the lawfulness of the decision taken be determined,
unless the employer is to be faced with a dilemma for which there is no
lawful solution.
885. We required to decide the question of how to resolve that conflict on the
basis of the guidance we can derive by inference from the terms of the
Act, using the principles of statutory construction and applying relevant
case law. As the submissions from the parties in this area have not been
upheld we did not have specific argument from them on whether a
potentially lawful decision was or was not lawful in the circumstances of
this case. We considered that it was nevertheless part of our role to
answer this aspect in order to be able to answer some of the issues in the
case, in particular the circumstances and reasonableness of the claimant’s
perception for the claim of harassment when the second respondent was
in the same changing room she was using. It is a matter to which we return
at the conclusion of this judgment.
Context
886. We considered that it is helpful to set out first of all our view of the context
for the decision, as in our view that assists in identifying what test is
appropriate to apply from the terms of the Act.
887. We did not accept the second respondent’s evidence that “my identity is
female, ergo without wanting to appeal to the dictionary too much I am
biologically female”. That is not how the Supreme Court considered the
issue of sex under the Act, although it should be noted that its decision
was issued after the second respondent gave evidence. It held that sex
under the Act is not fundamentally a matter of the sense of identity as a
matter of psychology, which inevitably arises later in life, but of the nature
of the body as a matter of biology as perceived about the time of birth by
a medical professional. As we held above, the second respondent’s sex
under section 11 is male.

4104864/2024 Page 207
888. But section 11 is not the only section of relevance in determining the
issues before us in light of our analysis of the impact of FWS. Section 7 is
equally relevant, and unlike the binary position of sex has a range of
possible circumstances that fall within it.
889. We considered the basic facts of the case. The second respondent has
the protected characteristic of gender reassignment, and as we shall come
to has changed essentially all the non-physiological attributes of sex.
There was no evidence before us of any of the physiological attributes of
sex having changed. The second respondent was therefore someone
further along the transition process than the claimant in Croft, but not from
the evidence before us at the stage of having had and completed surgery
and medical treatment in cases such as Goodwin, Bellinger and others.
890. At the initial stages the understanding of the first respondent was that the
second respondent had been using the changing room when in the
department before formally joining that department. The second
respondent was not aware of any issue having arisen. The first respondent
granted permission in circumstances where from the evidence before us
it was not apparent to it that there would be a complaint made. It granted
permission in accordance with its general position as set out in its Equality,
Diversity and Human Rights policy which is, to summarise it very briefly,
that it seeks to be inclusive for all persons. The general position of the first
respondent was also spoken to by Ms Bumba.
891. The claimant did have an issue with the second respondent, who she
believed to be male, using a space she considered to be capable of use
only by biological females, and raised that with Ms Davidson on 26 August
2023. That was an entirely proper approach for her to take given her
protected belief. The claimant was fully entitled to raise her concerns, and
she did so at that stage in the manner that would be expected, by going
to her line manager (technically the manager above her line manager but
that distinction is irrelevant for these purposes).
892. The claimant was later informed by Ms Davidson that there was no basis
to exclude the second respondent from the changing room. When told that
the first respondent in effect did not agree with her own position, the
claimant did not raise that matter formally as a grievance, although she
could have done so. But the claimant did at least make clear her view that
the presence of the second respondent in the female changing room was
not appropriate both to Ms Davidson and also Ms Curran. Even if the
claimant was the sole person making that point and doing so in that
informal manner it was a matter that required consideration. The first
respondent knew of it.
893. As there was no change to the permission there was the possibility of the
claimant and second respondent being in the changing room at the same

4104864/2024 Page 208
time, and that occurred on two occasions following the claimant’s making
of her complaints.
894. After the Christmas Eve incident, and following a not inconsiderable
period, the first respondent found a solution which involved arranging rotas
such that the claimant and second respondent were not at work at the
same time, and thus there was no realistic risk of either of them being in
the changing room at the same time as the other. The claimant returned
to work on 14 April 2024 on that basis. Throughout the period from August
2023 to April 2024 and beyond the only complaint about use by the second
respondent of the changing room made to a manager of the first
respondent came from the claimant.
The employer’s dilemma
895. Where there is a conflict of protected characteristics and of beliefs of the
nature that arises in this case an employer is faced with an exceptionally
difficult matter to address. Whatever decision it takes can be challenged
as unlawful under the Act, most obviously as one of harassment, but
potentially direct or indirect discrimination in addition. Dependent on the
facts there may be others (alluded to in Forstater)
896. The difficulties in taking a decision can be impacted by other factors. The
terms of section 7 are we consider indicative of there not being a simple
and single answer to how to resolve the conflict, as it does not require any
presentation in the chosen gender, if it is made sufficiently clear that the
person is proposing to undergo the process referred to. As the definition
of gender reassignment includes the prospective therefore future
intention, the presently undergoing, and the historic which may have
completed and may but need not include surgery and other medical
interventions effecting changes to physiological attributes of sex, the
circumstances and visual appearances of those with that protected
characteristic can vary substantially.
897. A trans person who is biologically of one sex may present to those who
are unaware of the background which may include surgery, hormonal and
other treatment, entirely as of the other sex. A trans person may well, and
from the evidence considered at the Tribunal and as addressed in
Bellinger (in the part in the Appendix to this Judgment) will, retain some
elements of the biology of the sex assigned at birth despite that surgery
and the hormonal and other treatment. How a trans person thinks that they
are perceived by others may or may not be how all do so. A trans person
may also choose not to have surgery or hormonal or other treatment, or
may be waiting for that to commence or to conclude.
898. The person may present fully in the gender after transition, or to an extent
in the gender desired. If the latter that may be where most or some people
looking at the person would be able to recognise aspects of physiological

4104864/2024 Page 209
attributes of the sex as assigned at birth. There is not always a simple
answer to the issue of appearance. Some such as the claimant regarded
the second respondent from what she observed as male. Others who may
observe the second respondent may regard the second respondent as a
female, as set out in our findings in fact.
899. A trans person may wish to retain as private details of what changes to
physiological attributes of sex have been made, or choose to disclose as
to some or all of them. A trans woman who wishes to live life fully in the
gender that the person has transitioned to, or is transitioning to, may well
have a desire to use female spaces such as toilets or changing rooms as
a part of doing so, and to use the changing room for males may well be
seen as direct discrimination or harassment as it is so contrary to their
perception of identity. The difficulties may be increased if an individual has
differences of sexual development, or has been assigned one sex at birth
with a body which changed after puberty.
900. The range of different circumstances for those with the protected
characteristic, and what they choose to reveal to others about very private
matters of their transition, is potentially therefore very wide. These
considerations taken together would tend to suggest that a number of
different considerations will require to be taken into account, and that there
may be no solution which will please all concerned.
901. Places such as changing rooms and toilets at work premises can cause
particular difficulties in this already very complex area. They are places
where persons using them will normally wish to have a degree of privacy.
They may be in a state of at least partial undress when changing. They
may feel vulnerable or a sense of embarrassment or similar from that fact.
There may be a desire to be present only with those who share their same
sex and biology. This was essentially the claimant’s position.
902. As the evidence in the case indicated, some staff who could have used
the changing room chose not to do so, and we infer that that was because
they preferred to have greater privacy when changing than would be the
case in a communal space.
903. The claimant did not wish to be in a changing room with a person
biologically male, a matter likely to have been affected as she had
experienced inappropriate behaviour when relatively young. That
experience had not been articulated to anyone at work at the material time.
The private feelings and concerns of employees may only therefore be
known to each one individually and privately, and for entirely good reasons
they may not wish to discuss them with anyone at work. That exacerbates
the difficulties facing an employer.
904. It appears to us that what staff choose to tell the employer is a material
factor in assessing the decision. For a test to be workable it appears to us

4104864/2024 Page 210
that the employer can only make a decision on the basis of what it knows
or ought reasonably to know, whether from the trans person or any other
member of the staff.
905. If there are no alternative toilet facilities, such that there is only a choice
between using a male or a female toilet at a location, practical questions
arise as to which one to use for a trans person whilst at work, which may
well be for a shift period of eight hours or longer. The dilemma facing a
trans person is something that the Supreme Court referred to in FWS,
rather than the dilemma facing the employer, but the court’s use of the
word dilemma recognises in our view the fact that there is a difficult choice
to be made when such issues arise.
906. Whichever single sex facility is used, where there is a binary choice of
male or female facilities as there are no other options, can be open to
challenge – if a trans woman uses the female facility that can be argued
to be harassment by a biological woman as the sex of the trans woman
under the 2010 Act is male, and if the male facility is used by a trans
woman that can be argued to be harassment by those within it particularly
perhaps when the appearance of the trans woman is wholly perceived by
them as a female. The trans woman is as addressed above likely to regard
the treatment of being required to use the male changing room, and not
the female one as is desired, as a detriment, potentially a matter of direct
discrimination if there is treatment such as an instruction to use the male
changing room, and otherwise as harassment and indirect discrimination.
907. Whilst indirect discrimination has the objective justification defence in
section 19(2)(d) there is no such defence for a harassment claim under
section 26. The qualifiers are whether it is related to a protected
characteristic, whether the perception of harassment is reasonable, and
the other circumstances. But on at least one view it may be reasonable for
the claimant to perceive harassment from the presence of the second
respondent in the changing room, and reasonable for the second
respondent to perceive harassment if excluded from it, with in each case
the harassment related to a protected characteristic.
908. If a trans man, with the appearance of a man effected by surgery and
hormonal and other treatment, having facial hair, a flat chest, a low voice,
as well as traditionally male choices in hair styling, clothing, and lack of
any make-up or jewellery (and therefore in effect similar in presentation to
the hypothetical comparator of “Pete” but someone who is a trans man
with the protected characteristic) attends the female toilets, which on the
claimant’s view of the Supreme Court decision is on the face of it
appropriate as their sex is female, that may be thought harassment by a
biological woman related to sex who perceives the person as a male from
that appearance and is unaware of the gender reassignment protected
characteristic.

4104864/2024 Page 211
909. All those in each facility of either sex may therefore argue that their rights
under the Act have been breached however the employer decides to
proceed where there are only male and female facilities, and there may
be either no or very limited defences to those claims. If there is no solution,
the employer will be liable in law whatever it does.
910. In other circumstances there may be other facilities available, such as a
toilet or room that can be used alone by either sex. It seems to us that the
extent of the options available, or that there are only male or female
facilities and no other at that time, is a factor that can be relevant.
911. There is a practical difference between the circumstances of the
workplace, and those of public services. For a workplace the employer
knows who is to be present. The employer has the ability to give
reasonable instructions to its employees. The relationship is underpinned
by contractual obligations each owes the other. Where public services are
being provided it is not clear who is to be using them, when and how.
There is a different relationship between the service provider and service
user to that of employer and employee.
912. There are other areas where two sets of protected characteristics are in
conflict. An example was given in FWS by reference to Ladele at the Court
of Appeal. Those at work have many varied and at times contrary beliefs
on issues such as religion and politics. Work is generally speaking not an
appropriate place to air such beliefs, particularly with those who do not
share them. That principle in our view underlies the cases about
proselytizing at work, which are addressed more fully below.
913. But conflict is not always to be expected. There may be circumstances
where all staff are content that a trans person uses the facilities of the sex
they have the intention to transition to at whatever stage that transition has
reached. There may be other circumstances where staff feel
uncomfortable to some extent with a trans person being present in the
changing room but not wish to make any complaint or issue about it. If
there are no complaints or issues raised, that would be an indicator that
the wishes of the trans person on which facility to use can be
accommodated. The complaint may be raised formally or informally. The
nature of the responses of other staff, or lack of same, which may differ
from one workplace to another, in our view is a further factor to consider.
914. In addition to the issue of protected characteristics there is a conflict
between human rights and the rights each has under the Directive account
of which is to be taken when construing the Act purposively in each case.
We considered that the claimant’s Article 8 right was engaged. When in a
changing room and in a state of partial undress, or where others could be,
there was she considered an impact on her sense of privacy and dignity.
There is some general support for that in paragraph 52 of FWS, which
although in the context of the 1975 Act rather than human rights refers to

4104864/2024 Page 212
a reasonable expectation where people are undressing that
considerations of privacy and decency required separate facilities to be
permitted for men and women. There is also support from the case of YF.
Her rights under Articles 9 and 10 were also engaged, that in summary
being her gender critical belief.
915. We considered that the second respondent’s Article 8 rights were also
engaged. The second respondent wished to present to the world in the
gender identified with, a matter referred to in authority both European and
domestic. It is a part of the aspect of being a trans person, some support
for which is seen in Work and Pensions. The second respondent had
declared an intention to live in that gender, and had assumed the non-
physiological attributes of the female sex for a material period. The second
respondent believed that the second respondent was a woman, and
believed in a right to live as a woman. That also engaged Article 9 and10
rights.
916. Each of the claimant and second respondent had rights under the Equal
Treatment Directive as assimilated law, which in essentials can be treated
as the not materially different to their respective human rights.
917. Both the claimant and second respondent therefore had different
protected characteristics and different aspects of the same human rights,
and rights arising under assimilated law, and those two sets of provisions
were largely and in relation to use of the changing room wholly in conflict.
That each of them can point to at least some support from comments
made by the highest court in the UK emphasises in our view the
substantial difficulty these matters create for the employer in seeking to
find a solution.
The test to apply
918. We considered that the Parliamentary intention must have been that an
employer can act lawfully when faced with such a dilemma. If there is no
way of doing so the Act becomes in our view unworkable, and for the
reasons addressed above we did not consider that that was likely to have
been the Parliamentary intention. There is we consider some general
support for doing so from Pemberton, although in that case there was a
defence specifically provided for in the Act and its context is different.
919. As the Act does not specifically provide a test to apply in circumstances
where employees each rely on protected characteristics in the manner of
this case in our view it must be inferred. In light of our analysis above that
there are a number of differing factors and circumstances to take into
account, it must be one that can address those. It appeared to us from the
quotation from paragraph 151 of FWS that it is also a test which can
balance the conflicting rights.

4104864/2024 Page 213
920. We consider that the test to apply is that found in Bank Mellat, which was
applied to a different aspect of the 2010 Act in Page and Higgs. The test
in Bank Bellat was articulated in circumstances where there was a
challenge to the lawfulness of a statutory instrument on the basis of
Convention and other rights, and (as addressed in Higgs) is in relation to
the distinction between belief and impermissible manifestation for a direct
discrimination claim under the 2010 Act. In our view the test can be applied
more widely to the resolution of a conflict between protected
characteristics. That is so as there is at least to some extent a correlation
between the protected characteristics founded on by the parties on the
one hand, and their human rights and assimilated law rights on the other,
and in light of the Court of Appeal applying that test in order to construe
the Act in another respect under the Act, with the Supreme Court not
granting permission to appeal that decision.
921. The test is the most appropriate basis we have found to resolve the conflict
between protected characteristics held by employees. It has four
elements, being:
(i) Is the objective of the measure sufficiently important to justify
the limitation of a protected right,
(ii) Is the measure rationally connected to the objective,
(iii) Could a less intrusive measure have been used without
unacceptably compromising the achievement of the objective,
and
(iv) Whether, balancing the severity of the measure's effects on
the rights of the persons to whom it applies against the
importance of the objective, to the extent that the measure will
contribute to its achievement, the former outweighs the latter.
922. In each case the test is an objective one. Either the test is met in all four
of its elements, or it is not. It is for the first respondent as employer to
prove that it has been. If they fail to do so for any element, the decision
was not lawful.
923. In Higgs Lord Justice Underhill considered how that test had been applied
in Page, and said that
“my formulation does not directly apply the four-step process
identified in Bank Mellat, but it is a compressed version of the same
exercise, involving (a) the identification of a feature of the
employee's conduct to which the employer could legitimately object
(broadly corresponding to step (1)), and (b) an assessment of
whether the employer's response to that feature was proportionate
(broadly corresponding to steps (2)–(4)). It is no doubt best practice
to consider each of the Bank Mellat steps separately, but it is well

4104864/2024 Page 214
recognised that there is a considerable degree of overlap between
them.”
924. That was a comment in the specific context of the separability of belief and
manifestation, and although it could have been replicated for present
purposes we considered that it is preferable, in the context of resolving a
conflict between protected characteristics, simply to follow the Bank
Mellat test, rather than to seek to compress the elements of it. Whilst there
is a considerable degree of overlap between the second to fourth steps or
elements they are distinct ones and given the complexity of the question
before us it appeared to us to be helpful to follow each element as the
Supreme Court set out. It is nevertheless similar to the test of objective
justification in section 19(2)(d), as we shall address in that context below.
The outcome is liable to be the same in almost all cases in our view. Bank
Mellat is in essence a slightly more developed example of an objective
justification test.
Application to this case
925. We then applied the Bank Mellat test to the facts of this case. The first
respondent’s position as to the first element appears, it seemed to us, from
the aims it sought to pursue in relation to the section 19 claim which were
identified as (a) protecting and upholding the rights of the second
respondent under the Human Rights Act 1998 and the 2010 Act, (b)
promoting and upholding diversity and inclusion in the workplace; and (c)
appropriate use and provision of available facilities in the workplace. The
claimant accepted that these were legitimate aims for that purpose, and
they are consistent with other evidence we heard, including the terms of
the EDHR policy.
926. It appeared to us that relabelling those aims as objectives they met the
first element of the test. It also appeared to us that the measure of granting
permission to use the changing room was rationally connected to the
objectives, which met the second element.
927. There are then the third and fourth elements to be considered, which are
whether a less intrusive measure was possible and would achieve the
objectives, and the balancing of the severity of the measure on the party
concerned, in this case the claimant, against the importance of the
objective to the first respondent. We shall identify them by the shorthand
of the measure test and balance test respectively.
(i) Measure test
928. In our view this test is to be applied in three different periods, each of which
is to be considered separately. We considered that the commentary of the
Supreme Court in FWS in relation to indirect discrimination and what the

4104864/2024 Page 215
employer knew or ought reasonably to have appreciated be applied in this
different context as well. It stated
“For indirect discrimination to be established, it must be possible to
reach general conclusions or make general assumptions about a
group with a particular protected characteristic such that an
employer or other duty-bearer ought reasonably to be able to
appreciate that any particular PCP applied to their workforce or
service users may have a disproportionately adverse impact on the
group……..
[after giving two examples] In both cases, the employer can
reasonably be expected to anticipate these consequences for
women as a group in the workforce and can therefore be expected
to justify the PCP before imposing it.”
(a) 2 August to 15 September 2023
929. The first period is when permission was initially granted from when the
second respondent started at the department up to the point at which the
claimant made her complaint. Until then it appeared to us that the first
respondent was entitled to proceed on the basis of there not being an
issue in contention as it was not aware, and could not reasonably have
been aware, that there was likely to be a perception of harassment by
other staff.
930. The second respondent had been present in the department on occasion
for a period before joining it, although that the detail of that was not given
in evidence. The second respondent told the first respondent that female
changing rooms and toilets had been used previously by the second
respondent without issue, and that was both as an employee of the first
respondent and earlier with a former employer Lothian Health Board.
There was no evidence before us, including Ms Bumba’s research both
on written material and from discussions with those holding equivalent
positions to her in other Boards or Trusts, that indicated an issue from the
policies that existed which were broadly consistent.
931. The claimant gave a little evidence of a suspicion of an issue that arose
with regard to the second respondent, and sought to obtain further
information about it from a colleague, but it appears without response. In
any event that did not appear to us to be in relation to use of a changing
room at all. We did not consider that there was any evidence of something
that should have put the first respondent on reasonable notice at that time
that an issue of the nature that did later arise was liable to do so.
932. In those circumstances, we considered that granting permission in early
August 2023 was the least intrusive measure. It was not known, nor was
it reasonable to expect that it be known, that it would lead to an adverse

4104864/2024 Page 216
impact on another employee as it had not been an issue raised with the
first respondent, or more widely identified as an issue within the NHS in
Scotland. From that, it appeared to be a matter operating without
materially affecting other staff adversely. That was in the context of there
being both two trans women and a trans man employed by the first
respondent from the evidence we heard. Once a complaint was made it
then required investigation and a decision. For this initial period we
consider that the first respondent met the measure test. The reason for
the date of 15 September 2023 we address in the next period.
(b) 16 September 2023 to 13 April 2024
933. After the claimant’s complaint was made initially to Ms Davidson it seemed
to us that the view as to measures at that stage must be informed by a
common sense consideration of what the options were. There is nothing
special about the changing room in this case – it is a fairly standard form
of provision found in many workplaces. Whilst most often a person who
uses it is able to use one of the toilet cubicles if fully changing clothing or
simply if they prefer to, not all do. In some workplaces there is effectively
only a choice between male or female facilities. In others, there may be a
greater range. In this case there were options beyond the male and female
changing rooms, including ones that a few female members of staff had
chosen to use instead of the changing room, and that range included
single user spaces such as a well-being room, or a store area, with both
having lockable doors. They were not places to store clothing that the
locker room did, but could be used to change, albeit that that could be at
a measure of inconvenience if the staff member preferred to use a
changing room.
934. In the present case there were therefore choices that could be made. They
had been provided to the claimant by Ms Davidson and Ms Curran. The
claimant could have chosen to use other spaces than the changing room,
as other staff did such as the well-being room or store room, assuming
that they were free. But equally that choice could have been provided to
the second respondent, suggested on an interim basis until a more
permanent solution was found. Given what the second respondent stated
after the Christmas Eve incident to the effect that it might be proportionate
not to use that changing room we consider that on such a basis the second
respondent would have been open to such an option.
935. There was another possibility in our view, being that the second
respondent be permitted to use the room or one of the rooms that the
consultants used to change their clothes, again on an interim basis. That
was not directly addressed in evidence, but we infer it from the evidence
we did hear and the clear support for the second respondent from the
consultants as a whole, and those who gave evidence before us in
particular.

4104864/2024 Page 217
936. After the claimant raised her complaint how to address it required
investigation and consideration. It would have involved discussion with the
claimant and then the second respondent, discussion with managers of
each of them, consideration of the options and then a decision. We
considered that that process would have taken about three weeks and
therefore until 16 September 2023, on which date the decision to permit
the second respondent to use the female changing room ought to have
been revoked pending a more long-term solution being found.
937. We considered that there was a strong likelihood that at least one of these
options would have been a practical solution as an interim measure, and
any one of them, or a combination of them, would have been less intrusive
but still met the overall objective more widely. That was as the objectives
are general ones, and do not include the second respondent having an
unqualified right to use the changing room that is preferred. Interim steps
of such a nature in our view do still meet the objectives set out. We
consider that the second respondent would be likely to have accepted
such a decision on that interim basis from the evidence we heard on
matters more widely. As the first respondent had not in our view proved
that the grant of permission was the least intrusive measure to achieve the
objective they fail the measure test in part at this stage.
(c) From 14 April 2024 onwards
938. The third period is once a solution to rotas had been found such that after
the claimant returned to work on 14 April 2024 the claimant and second
respondent did not attend work and would not use the changing room at
the same time. At that point in our view the measure test was met.
Changing rotas to effect that was the least intrusive measure, with no
appreciable adverse impact on either the claimant or second respondent.
At that stage it was not anticipated that any other member of staff was
adversely impacted. No one other than the claimant made a complaint to
the first respondent, from the evidence we heard. The claimant’s evidence
of what others thought we have addressed above. We considered that the
first respondent met the measure test from that date onwards.
939. The claimant sought to argue in effect that all women felt as she did, or
could have a view on disadvantage as she did, such that the permission
should be permanently withheld to the second respondent. We did not
accept that argument. It was contrary to the evidence we heard. As stated,
with the exception of the claimant no female witness gave evidence of any
concern over the second respondent using the changing room and there
was evidence that other staff did not object to the second respondent
being in the changing room. Some of those who gave evidence for the first
respondent who were female supported the second respondent’s use of
the changing room. The weight of evidence we heard contradicted the
claimant’s argument in this regard.

4104864/2024 Page 218
940. We also rejected the argument of the claimant that a climate of fear
prevented the evidence being led. There was no proper evidential basis
for it, as we have addressed. Whilst the claimant argued that those with
religious views or otherwise might share the claimant’s beliefs no others
gave evidence of that. It was a form of speculation and not the facts of this
case. Our analysis of matters above led to a conclusion that what matters
when making these very difficult decisions is fact and circumstance which
includes what the employer knows or ought reasonably to know. That
depends on what employees tell it. That is the only way to make such
matters workable.
(ii) Balance test
941. We address the balance test separately although as has been noted there
is some crossover with the measure test. The severity of the measure was,
from the evidence we heard and have accepted, confined to the claimant,
but she had explained her position to Ms Davidson. She perceived the
presence of the second respondent as a man in the changing room as
intimidatory, and it caused her to feel a sense of embarrassment. It
affected her sense of privacy and dignity. As a matter of the sex of the
second respondent under the Act her consideration of the second
respondent as a man was accurate from FWS. Her perception of the
impact on her is one factor to consider. It was not minor or trivial, such that
it can be considered substantial as that term is defined in the Act.
942. We also consider that the terms of section 7 are instructive. Whilst sex is
binary, as we noted above, the position of someone who has the protected
characteristic of gender reassignment is not. We also noted above that
there are three tenses used in the section – the future (proposing to
undergo), the present (is undergoing) and the past (has undergone). That
suggested to us in the present context that the stage at which the transition
has reached, assuming it has commenced, is another relevant factor.
943. The definition in section 7 of the Act also refers separately to physiological
and non-physiological attributes of sex. In our view the terms of the section
suggest that in this context, the use of a place as a changing room where
staff are at least partly undressed where there is one for females and
another for males, that what if any change to a trans person’s physiological
attributes of sex have been made, to the extent that the trans person
chooses to disclose them, is also a relevant factor.
944. In West Yorkshire it was the completion of the transition process that was
the basis for the decision. To repeat what Lady Hale there said “a
transperson is to be regarded as having the sexual identity of the gender
to which he or she has been reassigned.” That is in the past tense, and
appears to us to apply where there has been completion of such a process
similar to the circumstances of that case. ECtHR and CJEU decisions are
to similar effect. It is not determinative of the question, but it is in our view

4104864/2024 Page 219
an indicator that the balance test may be met in respect of such granting
of permission where the physiological attributes of sex have been changed
than where they have not, either fully or at all.
945. It appeared to us to follow that if the person has not completed that
transition process, who retains the physiological attributes of sex at birth
either wholly or to a material extent, that is a factor to weigh in the balance.
If the person’s body remains male that may well be a contra-indicator to
the grant of permission to use a female changing room where one or more
of the female staff using it have a reasonable concern of an impact on their
sense of dignity. That is close to the circumstances addressed in Croft,
and is broadly consistent with its reasoning on not allowing use of the
female changing room where the person had recently started the process
of transition.
946. We considered that Croft remained of assistance to an extent in
determining some of the issues before us, although it does not appear to
us that all of it survives FWS. The Court of Appeal decision states that the
Tribunal must make a judgment when someone born male with the
protected characteristic of gender reassignment “becomes a woman”.
That is not consistent with the Supreme Court decision that a person
retains the sex assigned at birth. A trans woman does not, and cannot,
become a woman under section 11 in light of that decision. But Croft
supports the proposition that an employer and then a Tribunal where a
claim is presented can take into account the stage of transition the trans
person has reached. But in an area where there is little direct assistance
from authority we consider that it can be taken into account so far as not
inconsistent with FWS.
947. There having been no evidence led before us that any of the physiological
attributes of the second respondent’s sex had changed we concluded that
the second respondent had only changed the non-physiological attributes
of sex to those that were female, such that the physiological attributes of
sex remained male.
948. In the context of balancing the two sets of rights, the claimant having the
sex of a female had as a matter of common sense a clear and reasonable
expectation to use the female changing room, she had been doing that for
about twelve years, and doing so was she considered an aspect of her
dignity. Had the Supreme Court held that a trans woman was a woman for
the purposes of the Act the second respondent would have had an equally
clear and reasonable expectation to use the female changing rom, but as
it did not the indication is that it is at the least more nuanced than the
position of a biological female.
949. It appeared to us that the extent of objections by other staff to a trans
person in a changing room and the reason for that is also a factor to
consider. Here all that the employer was aware of at the time was an

4104864/2024 Page 220
informal complaint from one member of staff, the claimant herself, on 26
August 2023, repeated informally in October 2023 twice. But that can be,
and in our view in this case is, sufficient. In our view the issue of who
complains and when is material, as also discussed in Mba. That there is
one complainant may make finding a solution easier than if there are
many. Where there are many complainants that may affect what options
are practical and which can be considered. Conversely if there are no
complainants at all a solution may more simply be found by doing what
the trans person wishes.
950. We considered whether the terms of the 2004 Act were of some
assistance in determining the stage a person might reach before it was
appropriate to permit use of the changing room for the aligned gender. It
was introduced to comply with the Convention, which the United Kingdom
was in breach of as found in Goodwin, and has a process to certify status.
The decision in FWS, and the conclusion that it did not determine a
person’s sex under the 2010 Act, indicated to us that it is not. In our view
the terms of the 2004 Act are not relevant when seeking to balance the
competing rights in this case, given the Supreme Court decision. It
confirms that certification may have value, but in the context of the dispute
in the present case it did not appear to us to do so, and in any event there
was no evidence of the second respondent having such a certificate, and
the evidence indicated that the conditions for securing it, in particular living
in the acquired gender for at least two years, may not have been met at
the material time.
951. There was no evidence that the first respondent had conducted any form
of equality impact assessment, or considered how other staff might view
matters and consulted with them. There is no specific duty to consult, and
the public sector equality duty under section 149 is not a matter that an
employee can directly rely on before us. At best it is a matter of
background. But that background may be relevant as addressed by the
Court of Appeal in R (Elias) v Secretary of State for Defence [2006] 1
WLR 3213. Not having conducted such an assessment is liable to make
proving compliance with the balance test more difficult for an employer,
but it is not determinative.
952. We concluded from all the above that whether to permit a trans woman to
use a particular single sex space such as a changing room which meets
the balance test depends on all the circumstances and includes factors
such as the views of other staff as expressed to the employer, how many
do so and in what terms, the stage of transition that the trans person has
reached including what if any changes to the physiological attributes of
sex the person have been made and which the trans person chooses to
inform the employer of, the trans person’s appearance as can be observed
by others, the wishes of the trans person, the options where other facilities
exist and what the employer knows or ought reasonably to know.

4104864/2024 Page 221
953. Our analysis indicated that as circumstances change, so can the
lawfulness of the decision. We therefore applied the test to the facts before
us.
(a) 2 August to 15 September 2023
954. In the first period for the reasons given above there was no complaint until
that by the claimant, there was not understood to be any detrimental
impact on another employee, nor was it reasonable to consider that that
ought to have been understood, and we considered that the first
respondent had proved that the balance test was met at that stage and for
the period for investigation and decision.
(b) 16 September 2023 to 13 April 2024
955. We concluded that the first respondent had not shown that its decision met
the balance test for the second period, during which the permission ought
to have been revoked. At that point the claimant had explained her view
that the second respondent was a male, and there was nothing before the
first respondent to suggest that the second respondent’s physiology was
other than male. The second respondent’s observable appearance was
liable to be considered female by some and male by others. There were
options to consider, as noted above, which allowed time for a more
permanent solution to be found. Taking an interim step of revoking the
permission would we consider have been entertained by the second
respondent.
956. That meant, once again but for this separate reason, that the permission
that had been given ought to have been revoked for the time being. By not
doing so there was at the least a material possibility of the second
respondent using the changing room at the same time as the claimant, as
did occur on two occasions. The severity of the impact on the claimant
was in our view, having regard to the Supreme Court comments on
reasonable objection, not overridden by the objective. It was substantial
as we have explained.
957. It is stating the obvious to say that it is a difficult balancing exercise, and
when the events took place the guidance from the Supreme Court was not
available, but that judgment has clarified what the Act provided for from its
inception. We did not consider that the first respondent had established
that the balance test can be said to be met at that second stage on the
objective basis we have described.
(c) 14 April 2024 onwards
958. Once a solution to the crossover of dates on their respective rotas could
be found such that the possibility of their coming into contact in the
changing room was avoided, the third stage, any detrimental impact on
the claimant directly ended, and the evidence we heard was that no further

4104864/2024 Page 222
complaints or issues arose. It appeared to us, in light of that, that from the
time of the claimant’s return to work on 14 April 2024 there was an
appropriate balancing of the rights of those concerned. At that point the
balance test was met in our view. We rejected the claimant’s arguments
in relation to how other female staff felt or would be disadvantaged for the
same reasons as in relation to the measure test.
General comments
959. There are some further matters which we considered required comment.
The claimant argued that West Yorkshire has been entirely superseded
by the passing of the 2004 Act and the terms of FWS. We did not agree.
West Yorkshire is a case which addressed in part obligations which
remain a relevant matter to take into account. Separately as FWS has held
that the terms of the 2004 Act are not material for the purposes of the 2010
Act in its construction of the terms man and woman, it appeared to us that
the Supreme Court’s decision in that earlier case remains valuable
guidance for issues in this case, in circumstances where guidance is not
easily to be found. Similarly although the claimant argued that Croft
should also be entirely disregarded we did not agree as discussed above,
particularly as it is referred to by the Supreme Court without critical
comment.
960. We had regard to the case of R(T) v Chief Constable of Greater
Manchester Police [2015] AC 49, on which the claimant founded, but in
our view that case is distinguished on its facts. The circumstances of this
case are very different as there are at least two, and in our view three,
separate protected characteristics involved, and as we address in this
Judgment they all require to be considered.
961. We did not find assistance in determining the issues from the Advocate
General’s Opinion in Coleman v Attridge Law ECLI:EU:C:2006:61 relied
on by the respondents. Each of the claimant and second respondent
argued that their human rights were breached. Each is entitled to dignity
and personal autonomy. The context in this case was work. The extent of
autonomy one can expect is affected by that fact.
962. We also did not find assistance from SB v Governors of Denbigh High
School [2006] UKHL 15 on which the respondents also founded. Again
the context of that case was very different, being the educational
circumstances of a child. This case is not about social cohesion in that
same circumstance. Here the claimant accepts that the aims the first
respondent relied on are legitimate ones. That is not the issue – it is
whether the grant of permission was lawful or not.
963. If and to the extent that the terms of that Schedule might assist the
determination of the issue, which as we stated above we did not consider

4104864/2024 Page 223
was the case, on such a hypothesis they are we consider broadly
consistent with the approach we have taken.
Conclusion on the Bank Mellat test
964. We concluded that the first respondent had not met the measure test that
there was not a less intrusive measure than the grant of permission, for
the period from when a decision should have been made after the
claimant’s first complaint until a solution that involved rotas not crossing
over was found. The permission granted for that period did not meet the
balance test in relation to the rights and interests of the claimant and
second respondent. Before and after that period, the test was met in each
case.
965. On that basis we concluded that for the period 16 September 2023 to 13
April 2024 the grant of permission by the first respondent to the second
respondent was not lawful under the 2010 Act, and as a result the
claimant’s perception of harassment when the second respondent was in
the changing room on two occasions within those dates was reasonable
in the circumstances. Outwith those dates the grant of permission was
lawful under the 2010 Act, as her perception of harassment was not
reasonable in the circumstances. We address further aspects of the claims
of harassment below.
What happened around midnight on Christmas Eve 2023?
966. Not all of the matters were disputed. The claimant accepts that she
initiated the conversation. Whilst what exactly was said was disputed, it
is not in dispute that the central message conveyed by the claimant was
to the effect that she believed that the second respondent had no right to
be there as the second respondent was not a woman. There was
reference to the second respondent undergoing a process. There was a
reference to the case involving a trans person in prison. There was
reference to the claimant feeling intimidated.
967. The parts disputed were firstly a comment about the second respondent’s
chromosomes. We were satisfied that that comment had been made as
addressed above. The second was whether the claimant had repeated
her points, in a form of what can be described as a badgering conversation
including cutting across the second respondent. We are satisfied that that
occurred. The second respondent stated in evidence that that was after
the second respondent’s comments about understanding the claimant or
words to that effect. The claimant said in her own evidence that the second
respondent did not understand. It appears likely to us that as the claimant
felt that the second respondent did not understand that she would have
spoken to the second respondent as the second respondent stated in
evidence.

4104864/2024 Page 224
968. The third dispute was over whether the two of them were mainly not
looking at each other, as the claimant stated, or were doing so, as the
second respondent stated. We accepted the evidence of the second
respondent, which appeared to us to be substantially more likely. It would
have been a very odd introduction to a discussion for it to have happened
as the claimant alleged, and for it to have continued with neither looking
at the other.
969. The fourth was over what was happening during the conversation. We
accepted that the second respondent was at the basin when it started, that
the second respondent later moved towards the door, and that during the
conversation the second respondent had already changed out of scrubs
and into clothes to go home. The claimant claimed that the second
respondent was in scrubs, and changed after she had started speaking.
That would have meant that the conversation took place while the second
respondent was changing clothes. She said that she did not see that as
her head was turned away and heard what she thought was changing of
clothes, initially trousers. We concluded that that was likely to have been
the second respondent putting on a jacket prior to going outside.
970. In that regard it is surprising that the two staff members named in the
second respondent’s notes being Shwayts and Fiona were not interviewed
in the investigation. This was a disputed question of fact on which either
or both of them could confirm whether the second respondent was right
that by the time the second respondent entered the toilet, when at least
one of them was still present, the second respondent was wearing scrubs
or casual clothes. Ms Wishart could not, when giving evidence, recall that.
That is not unexpected given the very long passage of time.
971. Somewhat similarly for the incident on or about 27 August 2023 the
claimant said that she was alone with the second respondent whereas the
second respondent said that Sarah Richardson was present as well. Ms
Richardson was not interviewed or called as a witness.
972. The second respondent’s account of the incidents and in particular that on
Christmas Eve 2023 and into the following morning was given clearly and
candidly. We have concluded that the second respondent’s version of
events set out in the email to Dr Searle at 3.17am on 25 December 2023
is generally an accurate description of what happened between the
claimant and second respondent during their interaction about three hours
beforehand. It is not a transcript, and it is likely that the memories of each
of the claimant and second respondent are imperfect because of the
stress from such an exchange. It was however sent specifically for the
purpose of recording what had happened, was reasonably shortly after the
events, and is in our view not tainted by attempting to do so in a light
favourable to the second respondent, for reasons we shall come to.

4104864/2024 Page 225
973. We took into account that the second respondent had spoken to Dr Searle
on 23 October 2023 and had mentioned the August 2023 incident but not
in a manner to complain, instead to make the second respondent’s
supervisor aware lest matters escalate. That we considered indicated a
careful and considerate response to the situation as it developed, which
was seen both on 8 December 2023 and again during the Christmas Eve
incident.
974. During that last incident the claimant challenged the second respondent
on very personal matters going to a sense of identity, but the second
respondent sought to indicate a sense of empathy. The second
respondent stated, entirely reasonably in our view, that that was not the
time or place to make such comments, and that there was a formal
process that could be followed. We accepted the second respondent’s
evidence on those matters, which we considered were clearly an attempt
to de-escalate the situation, but which the claimant did not act upon.
975. The claimant did not make a written record of what had happened at or
about the time, and required to rely on her memory of what was obviously,
for both the claimant and second respondent, an upsetting exchange,
when she did give accounts of what happened. The first written account
from the claimant was in a message to a friend which referred to her
shaking like a leaf but otherwise gave no detail. The first more detailed
written account is the email intimating a claim from her solicitor on 15
February 2024. Its context is that, at that point, the claimant had not been
given any real detail of the complaint made against her. She had not then
seen the Datix report for example, which was sent to her six days later.
976. It has within it some matters we considered to be not accurate, as follows:
(i) the date of the first incident is given as on or about mid
November 2023, but we have found that it was on 26 August
2023
(ii) It alleges that Ms Davidson in the first discussion stated that
she would get the matter sorted, which we have found was
not what was said.
(iii) It alleges that Ms Davidson in the second discussion had said
she had raised the matter with HR but “never got anywhere”.
Again that is not what we have found was said.
(iv) It is stated that the claimant found herself alone in the female
changing room with the second respondent on Christmas
Eve. That is in our view misleading – as the claimant has
accepted that when she first attended the room there were
two other members of staff present as well as the second
respondent. She spoke to Ms Wishart. She was not alone at

4104864/2024 Page 226
that time, but she remained effectively waiting for the second
respondent to come out of the toilet. She did not find herself
in that situation, but acted in order to bring it about.
(v) The narrative in the email starts with telling the second
respondent that the claimant found the second respondent
undressing in front of her unacceptable. That is materially
different to the oral evidence, which did not refer to any
comment about the second respondent undressing and is a
matter we considered would more likely have been raised had
that been the trigger for a comment. For reasons we address
elsewhere we did not accept the claimant’s evidence that the
second respondent undressed in front of her – that changing
out of scrubs had been carried out after the second
respondent entered the room with two colleagues and before
the second respondent entered the toilet.
(vi) The narrative refers to the second respondent being
indifferent to the claimant’s upset. In oral evidence she
accepted that the second respondent had responded to her
by expressing sympathy to her which is not consistent with
being indifferent in our view.
(vii) There is no mention at all of the claimant’s reference to the
prisons incident, which the claimant admits she made.
(viii) There is no reference to a comment about a bad experience
with a male, which again the claimant admits she made.
(ix) There is no reference to asking about the second
respondent’s chromosomes, which we have found was made.
(x) There was no reference to the second respondent stating that
the meeting was not being the appropriate time or place to
raise her issues, which the claimant admitted was said by the
second respondent.
977. The next written account for the claimant is in her Claim Form. In relation
to “Facts” it is notable that there is no mention of the second respondent
going into the toilet cubicle, or coming out and washing hands. It states
that the second respondent was “fully dressed in his uniform” and once
the two other colleagues left “started to undress.” It then narrates what the
claimant says was discussed, says that she told the second respondent
“that she found the situation unacceptable” and referred to the “women’s
prisons incident” which was “ a reference to the Isla Bryson/Adam Graham
case.” It refers to her having had “a previous bad experience with a male”
but not to any question as to chromosomes. There are other details given,

4104864/2024 Page 227
so the foregoing is a part only of those pleadings, but there are we
consider inconsistencies between the email of claim, and the Claim Form.
978. The first oral account given by the claimant to the first respondent was to
Ms Glancey, initially in written form probably around late July 2023 and
then in person on 30 August 2023. That was a particularly long period of
time from the incident, and it is not surprising that the claimant’s
recollection of it may be imperfect. There are however inconsistencies
between what is stated in that August 2023 interview (“the initial
statement”), what is pled, and what the claimant said in her oral evidence
before us, including –
(i) The claimant in her initial statement stated that she was
standing with her back to her locker, and when she entered
she saw two colleagues, not the second respondent whom
she did not see until the second respondent left the toilet. In
her evidence in chief she said that when she arrived in the
changing room the second respondent was coming out of the
toilet.
(ii) What she said in the initial statement as to how the
conversation started was that “I told Beth I was feeling
embarrassed and intimidated, because Beth was in the room”
and in evidence was “I think its unacceptable that you are in
here.” That is also very different to the terms of the email of
15 February 2024.
(iii) In her oral evidence she agreed she had said that the second
respondent was a man, but that was not in the initial
statement.
(iv) In the initial statement she stated “I can’t remember saying to
him anything about my past but obviously I did because he
has mentioned it in his statement”, which on the face of it is
an admission both of an imperfect recollection and that the
comments in the second respondent’s written record were
accurate. In her oral evidence she had said that she told the
second respondent that she had previously had a bad
experience with a man, not referring to the earlier failure of
recollection. That earlier experience was also not mentioned
in the email of 15 February 2024.
(v) In the initial statement the claimant said “eventually he just
said there were protocols I could follow” in the context of what
in oral evidence the claimant described as a short
conversation of about two minutes duration, with the use of
the word “eventually” appearing to us to be more in
accordance with the second respondent’s description of a

4104864/2024 Page 228
more lengthy series of exchanges between them of between
five and ten minutes than the claimant’s evidence that it was
about two minutes.
979. There are some aspects of the claimant’s evidence we consider not
credible as noted above in relation to the prisons incident which is
particularly relevant in this context, with other matters relevant more
widely.
980. There are other aspects we considered not reliable including her evidence
that she had not remained in the changing room at Christmas to confront
the second respondent. In this respect, the two lay members relied on their
experience. Their view was that in the circumstances described by the
claimant the conduct expected of any woman in such a situation would be
to get clean clothing from the locker and proceed at that time to change in
the second and vacant toilet cubicle, rather than to do so in the presence
of anyone else whoever they were. That is also consistent with the
claimant’s evidence in chief that she was hurriedly going to the toilet, and
other evidence that she had changed in the cubicle in the past.
981. That the claimant did not go to the vacant cubicle to do that, but waited for
the second respondent to leave the other toilet cubicle, was we considered
more likely than not to have been as the claimant wished to confront the
second respondent. That was in circumstances of the claimant being in a
vulnerable position herself, which we take into account, but by not taking
what was the obvious step of entering the other cubicle, and then probably
remaining in the cubicle until the second respondent had left the changing
room. We concluded that the claimant’s evidence was not reliable on this
point, and noted further the inconsistency with the wording of the email of
15 February 2024 that the claimant had found herself alone with the
second respondent.
982. That was all the more so given the two earlier circumstances when the
claimant waited outside, and when there were two other female staff
initially present as well. The claimant could have spoken to the second
respondent when those two others were present, but waited until they
were alone together, which is also we consider consistent with a wish to
confront the second respondent, as well as to do so in private.
983. The intent to confront the second respondent is in our view also supported
by the timing, and earlier history when the claimant had avoided the
second respondent in the changing room. On this occasion the claimant
did not leave. The second respondent was or had changed out of work
clothes (addressed below). The claimant said in her oral evidence that
when she arrived in the changing room the second respondent was
coming out of the toilet, whilst the other staff were still there. That timing
does not appear to us to be likely to be correct, as by the time the second

4104864/2024 Page 229
respondent left the cubicle the other staff had, on the second respondent’s
account, left which we considered far more likely to be accurate.
984. The claimant said in oral evidence that her first words to the second
respondent were as noted above - “I think it’s unacceptable that you’re in
here.”. In essentials it is we concluded how the conversation started,
although the words were “not appropriate”. We consider those words, and
the circumstance of the claimant waiting to be with the second respondent
alone in the changing room, also to be consistent with confronting the
second respondent. It did not refer to her feelings of intimidation or
embarrassment, rather that the second respondent should not have
entered, although the claimant was aware that permission to do so had
been given. The words used are consistent with the claimant taking the
matter into her own hands, when the decision of who was permitted to be
present was for the first respondent, not her.
985. The third aspect is that the claimant said that the exchange lasted about
two minutes. We are satisfied that that was her genuine perception of the
exchange, and it is broadly consistent with what she told family members
the following day which was a brief commentary on what had happened.
We did not consider that her estimate likely to be correct. There were
various matters addressed between them in our view, and the second
respondent’s evidence of a longer period of time we consider much more
likely to be accurate, and we have noted the use of the word “eventually”
above.
986. The fourth aspect is that the evidence of Ms Curran was that the claimant
had said that she had “confronted” the second respondent. The claimant
did not accept using that word, but we consider Ms Curran’s evidence
likely to be right on that, and that the claimant had used that word. It is
supported by the claimant saying in the investigation meeting with Ms
Glancey that she told Ms Davidson in October 2023 that she would “have
it out” with the second respondent if it happened again. Ms Davidson did
not recall that, and said to Ms Glancey that had the claimant said
something to that effect she would have discussed the appropriateness of
that and sought to de-escalate the situation. That appears to us to be more
likely, and the claimant’s evidence that she did say that to Ms Davidson
not reliable. But that was the claimant’s evidence and it supports the
concept of a confrontation, in our view.
987. The fifth aspect is that the claimant’s evidence is that the conversation
took place whilst the second respondent was changing out of scrubs and
into casual clothes. The second respondent’s evidence was that that
change into casual clothes had taken place before entering the toilet. We
preferred the second respondent’s evidence as
(i) The claimant said that she had looked away from the second
respondent, and looked at the second respondent to see a jacket being

4104864/2024 Page 230
zipped up. It does not appear that the claimant consistently alleges that
she directly saw any changing take place, partly as she said on one
occasion that she did so out of the corner of her eye and that in oral
evidence she understood that the second respondent was changing from
listening, with the pleading stating that she “had her back to the second
respondent throughout this exchange”.
(ii) It appears to us contrary to common sense that someone being spoken
to as the claimant accepts that she did would simply have carried on
removing clothing and changing into casual clothes. Leaving aside the
disputed words, the claimant said that the second respondent should not
be in the room as the second respondent was not a woman, that the
claimant felt intimidated and embarrassed, and that it was like the prisons
incident. The claimant accepted that that reference may have been taken
as an allegation of being a sexual predator, although she said that it was
not her intention to do so. To continue undressing in such a situation is not
we consider at all likely. What was being said would in our view have
stopped the person doing what they had been, and to engage with the
discussion as it was in effect a direct challenge to them.
(iii) We consider that the second respondent’s evidence of entering the
changing room with two female colleagues was most likely to be right, and
is consistent with the claimant’s evidence of there being three people in
the room at or shortly after the point when she entered. This was before
midnight on Christmas Eve. The two other colleagues left the room not
long afterwards, as both the claimant and second respondent agree
although the timing of when they did so is not agreed upon.
988. We infer from that evidence that the two members of staff had entered the
changing room in scrubs after the end of their shifts, changed into work
clothing, and then left. That is entirely as one would expect given that this
was approaching Christmas Day, when the expectation is that staff
finishing a shift would wish to get home as quickly as possible. It seems
to us to be consistent with that overall background that the second
respondent will have done the same, which is to change out of scrubs into
casual clothes when the two colleagues did so, preparing to leave without
delay. It would have been unusual for the second respondent not to have
done so, and had that happened we consider it likely to have been noticed
as such by Ms Wishart. That she remembered nothing unusual is we
consider consistent with the second respondent doing effectively the same
as the other colleagues in changing into casual clothing.
989. The final aspect is that the claimant said in evidence that she had to wait
until the second respondent referred to raising protocols and her agreeing
to that before the second respondent left, and that she had wanted the
conversation to end. It was however one that she had initiated.

4104864/2024 Page 231
990. It appeared to us that the most reliable evidence of the exchange is partly
from the notes made at around 12.45am, less than an hour after the
exchange, although with some detailed amendments set out in the
Borwick report, and then more particularly the email sent by the second
respondent to Dr Searle a little over three hours after the incident ended.
It states that it seeks to give the best recollection. It was broadly consistent
with the phone notes.
991. It did not appear to us, on its terms, to do other than set out what
happened. For example it stated that the conversation started when the
second respondent was at the sink washing hands. That detail is not one
that would be expected to be one liable to be disputed, although it turned
out that it was. It appeared to us to be a simple point of that detail given at
the time. It refers to the two colleagues and what had happened such that
if there was any issue the first respondent could (and in our view should)
have sought to interview them and check their recollection with that of the
second respondent. That giving of their names is we considered more
likely to be consistent with the second respondent giving an honest
recollection from the time.
992. It ended with a commentary about resolving the issue, not directly as any
form of attack on the claimant. We took into account the degree of distress
that had been experienced which can obviously affect recall, and the
circumstances, but overall we considered that it is more likely to be a
reasonably accurate and recently given account.
993. Where there were disputes between the claimant and second respondent
on the conversation on 24/25 December 2023 we considered that the
overall evidence, and applying a measure of common sense, supports the
second respondent. Simply by way of one example, the second
respondent was asked in examination in chief how long the interaction
with the claimant on 24 December 2023 had taken, and in summary said
that it was between 5 and 10 minutes but that in such a situation which
was stressful and upsetting the second respondent found it hard to judge
time. That was in contrast to the claimant whose own time estimate was
of 2 minutes. Having regard to the evidence as a whole we considered
that the estimate of between 5 and 10 minutes was broadly likely to be
accurate, with it being closer to 5 minutes than 10.
994. The second respondent spoke in evidence of the use by the claimant of
words to the effect “what are your chromosomes?” The claimant did not
recall using such words, but did not state in terms that she definitely did
not say those words or ones like that. We considered it far more likely that
she did. Firstly the note taken shortly afterwards records that, as does the
email to Dr Searle sent a little over three hours after the incident. Secondly
the second respondent was very clear in evidence to us including during
cross examination that those words had been used. Thirdly they would be

4104864/2024 Page 232
odd words to fabricate. The comment is unlikely to have been made up in
our view. Fourthly they are consistent with the general tenor of the
claimant’s remarks that, in her view, the second respondent was a man
not a woman, which was raised as a matter of biological sex of which
chromosomes are one element. Fifthly the language used by the claimant
was in other respects also challenging of the second respondent, such as
the comment that the second respondent was not entitled to be in the
changing room, and the reference to the incident in prisons. Having regard
to the evidence as a whole we were satisfied that those words had been
used by the claimant. We concluded that in what must have been for both
participants a highly charged and stressful event the claimant’s
recollection was not reliable.
995. We considered that the notes on the mobile phone were generally
recorded as accurately as the second respondent could achieve. Some
were undertaken after the end of a shift, but that on 24 December 2023
was recorded fairly shortly afterwards and in some detail. The resus
incident was not recorded contemporaneously and there are issues over
those where the dates do not coincide with the entry, as noted in Mr
Borwick’s report. But the resus incident was set out in the 26 December
2023 email to the BMA.
996. The written record of the Christmas Eve incident, not just from the notes
on the mobile but also the email to Dr Searle about three hours after it took
place, being near-contemporaneous, from a person who had not initiated
the conversation, and who had been in the changing room as permission
in effect to do so had been given when Dr Searle spoke with the second
respondent on 16 August 2023, was we considered far more likely to be
accurate as a record than that of the claimant who had not taken any
contemporaneous notes for issues where there was a dispute, and whose
first record in writing of what happened was given in the letter of 15
February 2024, and from the claimant’s own words directly in the
investigation meeting with Ms Glancey held many months later.
997. There are other aspects of the evidence that we considered support the
second respondent’s version. The claimant’s evidence to the effect that
she simply raised her beliefs with the second respondent in a brief way
without repetition and aggression is we consider contradicted by the
evidence given by Dr Pitt of the second respondent being startled, fearful,
and so upset as to be sobbing. If the exchange had happened as the
claimant said, we did not consider it at all likely that the second respondent
would have presented in such a manner. We accepted Dr Pitt’s evidence
on this. That evidence was also supported to an extent by Dr Searle, who
noted a similar if less severe reaction by the second respondent on 29
December 2023.

4104864/2024 Page 233
998. We have commented above on the overall assessment of the evidence of
the claimant and second respondent. We also had regard to the
demeanour of each of those witnesses before us. In our view the second
respondent was both clearer, more candid in answering questions, and
more convincing in the description of the exchange than the claimant.
999. Taking account of all of the evidence we have heard and how it was given
we concluded that the evidence of the second respondent on matters of
fact in dispute between them should be preferred to that of the claimant
as being more reliable and materially more cohesive in nature having
regard to all of the evidence, the overall weight of which favours that of the
second respondent.
Did the claimant manifest her beliefs in a manner that was objectively
impermissible?
1000. The Tribunal dealt separately with the issues of pleading and from the List
of Issues in relation to this point, such that the question is one before us.
The onus is on the first respondent to establish that the claimant
manifested her beliefs in a way that was objectively impermissible. It can
be labelled in different ways, as the Note issued in relation to this matter
sets out.
1001. The Tribunal considered the position from the Court of Appeal decision
Higgs, and whether or not the claimant’s comments were, as she argued,
simply an expression of her belief permissibly carried out, or were
manifestations of that belief that were justifiably considered objectionable,
which is summarised as the heading set out above.
1002. The first question is: has the respondent proved that the treatment of the
claimant was the objectionable manner in which it been manifested,
assessed objectively? The second question is, if so, was the treatment of
the claimant proportionate, in the sense of objectively justified?
1003. The following was said by the Court of Appeal:
“In summary, Page was decided on the basis that adverse
treatment in response to an employee’s manifestation of their belief
was not to be treated as having occurred “because of” that
manifestation if it constituted an objectively justifiable response to
something “objectionable” in the way in which the belief was
manifested: it thus introduced a requirement of objective
justification into the causation element in section 13 (1). Further,
we held that the test of objective justification was not substantially
different from that required under article 9.2 (and also article 10.2)
of the Convention.”
1004. The decision was the subject of an attempted appeal, but the Supreme
Court did not give permission for that. In light of that, and the fact that the

4104864/2024 Page 234
issues are Great Britain wide rather than an area where Scots Law is any
different, in our view Higgs is to be regarded as binding on us.
1005. The first respondent accepted that it bears the burden of proving that the
requirements of Article 8(2) are met, as being in accordance with law and
necessary in a democratic society, with the claimant relying on R v
Shayler [2003] AC 247 and Handyside v United Kingdom [1976] 1
EHRR 737.
1006. Firstly the Tribunal concluded that the discussion between them did
involve the claimant making what was an attack on the sense of identity
of the second respondent, or putting it another way the second
respondent’s psychological integrity, by stating that the second
respondent was not a woman, or was a man, on several occasions. That
went beyond expressing her belief and into an argument that the second
respondent’s own belief as to personal identity was wrong.
1007. The claimant did so in an intrusive and confrontational way firstly by asking
about chromosomes which is in our view a clear invasion of privacy, and
secondly by referring to the “prisons incident”, which was admitted to be a
reference to the case of Isla Bryson/Adam Graham. It was we concluded
known to the claimant that the prisons incident was a reference to a
convicted rapist. It was to be expected that the second respondent would
take that reference to be an allegation that the second respondent was
also some form of sexual predator.
1008. The claimant further not only argued her points but contradicted and
interrupted the second respondent, for example when the second
respondent referred to having sympathy for the claimant.
1009. The conversation took place in the circumstances we have described,
which was when they were both at work, and included that the claimant
knew of the permission granted to the second respondent, and sought to
confront the second respondent about it as she did not agree with it. She
was arguing that the second respondent should act differently, and not on
the basis of the permission that had been given. That was as discussed
above her taking matters into her own hands when her argument ought to
have been with the first respondent which had given the permission, and
is a part of the context for assessment of the permissibility or otherwise of
the manifestation of her belief.
1010. That it was the claimant’s genuine and honest belief that the second
respondent was a man, and one that she was entitled to hold not least as
it conforms to the definition in section 11 explained in FWS, does not
lessen the impact of such a series of remarks on the second respondent
and on the belief that the second respondent also genuinely and honestly
held. It was in essence seeking to impose her beliefs on those of the
second respondent.

4104864/2024 Page 235
1011. When balancing the rights each has under Article 8, it appeared to us that
it is relevant that it was to another employee directly, which is entirely
different to the claimant expressing her beliefs formally (or informally) to
managers of the first respondent, to HR, or by complaint in writing, which
would not have been such a direct attack on the second respondent as an
individual.
1012. We considered the claimant’s submission that the protected characteristic
of gender reassignment “has no relevance unless and to the extent that
he could rely on it to establish a positive right of access to a female-only
space”. We did not consider that that was correct.
1013. What was to happen about the use of the changing room was not a matter
for decision by the second respondent. Nor was it a matter for decision by
the claimant. It was a matter for decision by the first respondent, subject
to the constraints of the law. In our view, Article 8 of the Convention gives
protection to the personal sphere of each individual, including the right to
establish details of their identity as individual human being. That applies
both to the claimant and the second respondent.
1014. Applying the Bank Mellat test to the decision to investigate the
allegations, and matters connected to that as a matter of general principle,
which lay at the heart of how the second respondent’s complaint was
managed, we considered as follows:
(i) The rights of the second respondent to dignity and a private life are
such that what might be described as the importance test is met
(ii) The steps taken by the first respondent were, in general and subject
to the qualifications below, such that what might be described as the
connection test is met
(iii) The measure test was met in relation to the requirement to
investigate, but was partly breached in three other and later respects
for the reasons addressed further below
(iv) The balance test was met in relation to the requirement to
investigate, but partly breached in those same three respects also
as addressed further below
1015. In submission it was argued that even if the claimant had been aware that
the prisons incident concerned a convicted rapist it was a stretch to infer
comparison of the second respondent with that person. We did not agree.
Firstly that is how the second respondent took it, and perceived the
comment to be. Secondly, that perception was reasonable in our view.
Thirdly what was said to be the point the claimant was seeking to make
was that a prison and a changing room in a hospital were places women
should be able to be confident they will not encounter men. That is not

4104864/2024 Page 236
however what she said. The words she used conveyed an entirely different
meaning when considered objectively.
1016. The claimant said in her evidence that she had not intended to offend, but
in matters of harassment both under section 26 and the first respondent’s
bullying and harassment policy the focus is not on intent but on the
perception of the person harassed, provided that that perception is
reasonable. In our view in this particular respect it was reasonable of the
second respondent to consider the comment to be harassing under the
terms of the first respondent’s policy, and it was, so far as this is relevant,
harassment related to gender reassignment and the second respondent’s
belief about being able to live as a woman under section 26 of the Act .
1017. The claimant’s comments in our view were broadly similar to cases where
proselytizing which led to dismissal was held to be lawful and not
discrimination because of religion or belief in Chondol v Liverpool City
Council [2009] UKEAT 0298/08, Grace v Places for Children [2013]
UKEAT 0217/13 and Wasteney v East London NHS Foundation Trust
[2016] ICR 643 the first and third of which the Court of Appeal approved
in Kuteh v Dartford and Gravesham NHS Trust [2019] EWCA Civ 818
as were all three again by the Court of Appeal in Higgs. What the claimant
was doing in our view was seeking to impose her view on the second
respondent that the second respondent should not be in the changing
room.
1018. The case of Wasteney included the following:
“An important aspect of the claimant's case is that Article 9 does
not merely protect the right to hold a particular belief but also to
manifest it. That is obviously right: without the right to express and
practise beliefs, the freedom of religion guaranteed by Article 9
would be rendered hollow. Seeking to translate that principle into
the language of domestic law, in Grace v Places for
Children UKEAT/0217/13/GE, 5 November, unreported, the EAT
(Mitting J presiding) observed:
'6. We agree … there is no clear dividing line between
holding and manifesting a belief and …
an unjustified unfavourable treatment because an employee
has manifested his or her religion may amount to unlawful
discrimination …' (Original emphasis.)
1019. In our view the claimant was seeking to persuade a colleague that her
view was right, and should be followed by the second respondent, contrary
to the wishes and beliefs of the second respondent, and contrary to the
permission given by the first respondent. She was in effect challenging its
decision directly with the person affected and doing so not with the first
respondent which had made the decision. Proselytizing can be defined as

4104864/2024 Page 237
attempting to convert someone from one religion, belief, or opinion to
another. It is a term normally used in the religious context, but is not
confined to that context. In our view in essentials that is what the claimant
sought to do.
1020. In the work setting, such proselytizing has obvious difficulties and dangers.
People may hold sincerely very strong personal beliefs of all manner of
kinds. They may be similar to, or very different from, those of others.
Seeking to persuade a colleague who does not share one’s belief that they
are wrong and you are right is an area of conflict that is not consistent with
a workplace that functions effectively. That is all the more clear in an area
such as a hospital where working as part of a team is so clearly important.
1021. The circumstances of the conduct and words of the claimant were far
closer to those in Lilliendahl than those in Higgs in our view, and although
that is not determinative it assists in seeking to characterise what
happened. The words used by the claimant were not written but spoken,
in reasonably close proximity between two members of staff who were
otherwise alone, and included terms in part the second respondent entirely
reasonably found intrusive and highly offensive. They went beyond a
simple expression of belief and the concern the claimant felt, and included
comparison with a convicted person in prison who was a rapist. Doing so
in such a manner on that scenario did we consider amount to the kind of
environment Lilliendahl refers to.
1022. We also considered the list of factors the EAT in Higgs referred to, noting
that they are not exhaustive and may not all apply as the Court of Appeal
confirmed. We have noted the context of a face to face meeting at work in
the circumstances referred to, above. We concluded for those parts we
considered relevant as follows, retaining the original numbering:
(i) the content of the manifestation included highly intrusive and
damaging comments;
(iii) the extent of the manifestation was in our view reasonably
significant in that the claimant made a number of separate points,
doing so in some respects on more than one occasion;
(v) the extent and nature of the intrusion on the rights of others, and
any consequential impact on the employer’s ability to run its
business – the intrusion on the rights of the second respondent was
we consider highly significant, creating material and continuing
distress
(vii) whether there is a potential power imbalance given the nature
of the worker’s position or role and that of those whose rights are
intruded upon – there is in our view very little relevance in this area.

4104864/2024 Page 238
The claimant was a nurse and not in the same line management as
the second respondent, who was a doctor
(viii) the nature of the employer’s business, in particular where there
is a potential impact on vulnerable service users or clients – the
setting of a hospital is in our view relevant, given that it will include
the treatment of trans patients, and that there are other trans staff,
and
(ix) whether the limitation imposed is the least intrusive measure
open to the employer – we address this separately below.
1023. Having undertaken that exercise we remained of the view that the
conclusion was appropriate. Our conclusion was in our view also
supported by the comments in Forstater with regard to the possibility of
harassment if a person with the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment is misgendered. To repeat the EAT comments in that
regard:
“That does not mean, however, that those with gender-critical
beliefs can indiscriminately and gratuitously refer to trans persons
in terms other than they would wish. Such conduct could,
depending on the circumstances, amount to harassment of, or
discrimination against, a trans person.”
1024. That is we consider essentially another way of expressing the distinction
between permissible and impermissible manifestations of belief. To use
non female descriptors for the second respondent was not what the
second respondent wished. As stated in Forstater, a protected belief does
not give carte blanche to say whatever the person holding those beliefs
wishes. What was said in that case about misgendering potentially being
harassment applies a fortiori to what the claimant said in these regards, in
our view. Given the context of the workplace, and against the background
of the first respondent having given permission to the second respondent
which the claimant was aware of, it appears to us to fall clearly within the
description of what could be harassment set out by the EAT in that
decision.
1025. The EAT also in that case in a footnote to paragraph 99 set out the
protected characteristics which such harassment may be related to that a
trans person could pursue under the Act in such circumstances as follows
“A trans person could potentially bring a claim for harassment
related to gender reassignment (where the definition under s.7(2)
is satisfied), sex (see e.g. P v S and Cornwall County Council
[1996] ICR 795 at paras 17 to 22), disability based on the conditions
of Gender Dysphoria or Gender Identity Disorder (see EHRC Code

4104864/2024 Page 239
at para 2.28), or even a philosophical belief that gender identity is
paramount and that a trans woman is woman.”
1026. As we have noted above, that decision was approved by the Supreme
Court. The belief that is referred to is, from the decision of the EAT,
protected even if in conflict with the definition of woman that the Supreme
Court provided, just as a gender critical belief is protected even if not
consistent with the terms of section 7, the Equal Treatment Directive,
Article 8 of the Convention, and case law deriving from those sources.
What the second respondent did in the various oral and written complaints
made in our view was to raise with the employer an allegation that another
employee had acted in a manner that constituted harassment.
1027. What was not entirely clear from the second respondent’s complaints and
how the first respondent addressed them was whether it was alleged that
all that the claimant said was said to be that, or only parts and if so which
parts. That lack of clarity remained from the evidence of how the first
respondent addressed matters. It was not entirely dispelled from
submissions. We consider that, as explained in Higgs, it is necessary to
identify what was said, and apply the test as to whether the respondents
have proved that that was impermissible manifestation.
1028. The result of our analysis is that not all of the claimant’s comments were
impermissible manifestations of her belief. Telling the second respondent
that she did not think it appropriate for the second respondent to use the
changing room is an expression of her belief, and permissible. Explaining
that she felt intimidated is an expression again of how she felt and is
permissible. Saying that she had no problem with the second respondent
and referring to going through some form of process is somewhat
disparaging but we consider should not be held to be objectively
impermissible. Saying that maybe she was the only member of staff who
felt able to raise the issue and referring to a bad history with men is not
objectively impermissible. Saying that it would help if the second
respondent did not change in the changing room is not objectively
impermissible. Saying that women have a right to feel safe is not
objectively impermissible. Saying that she would raise the matter is also
not objectively impermissible.
1029. So far as her other comments are concerned, they were impermissible
manifestations of her belief and were in our view what amounted to an
incident of harassment by the claimant of the second respondent related
to the protected characteristic of gender reassignment, reasonably
perceived by the second respondent to be so, and were a breach by the
claimant of section 26 of the Act and of the Bullying and Harassment
Policy. The second respondent was entitled to view the actions of the
claimant in those particular regards as being such harassment, or as a
“hate incident” within the policy, and the first respondent was entitled in

4104864/2024 Page 240
principle to act on the complaint made, but the detail of how it did so
depends on all the circumstances as more fully addressed below. The
second respondent was also entitled to regard the claimant’s actions as a
breach of the second respondent’s Article 8 rights, so far as the claimant’s
expression of her beliefs was impermissible.
1030. The claimant’s evidence on what was said, and for how long, reflects in
our view a lack of recognition of the extent to which she challenged the
second respondent on several occasions. That may well have been as the
second respondent did not agree with her, although rather than argue the
point the second respondent we consider was seeking to de-escalate it by
comments that it was not the right time to raise it, and that there were
protocols to do so (by which the second respondent meant formal
grievance processes). There was an impact on the claimant, but in our
view materially more limited than the impact her words and how she said
them had on the second respondent. There is a clear contrast to the
evidence of Dr Pitt of the second respondent’s demeanour when they met
a little after the incident, and that of Ms Curran who saw the claimant later
on in her shift and did not notice anything by way of difference to her
presentation prior to the incident. The claimant did not speak to Ms Curran
during the shift after midnight that day to inform her of the incident.
1031. That the claimant did not recognise the impact her words had on the
second respondent was also we considered exemplified by a message to
a friend about the interaction she said that she “did not even bully”, and
that was her genuine perception. But it was not accurate in our view.
1032. We appreciate that our conclusion that what the claimant did amounted to
harassment and that is not the outcome of the first respondent’s
disciplinary hearing which held that there had not been sufficient evidence
to uphold the complaint made, but it appeared to us that deciding the
context in which matters unfolded is essential to determining the issues in
the case, one of which is whether the second respondent made a false
complaint against the claimant. Unlike the first respondent in its process
with the claimant we had the benefit of evidence from both the claimant
and second respondent, given on oath, with representation and
documentation that we have assessed in light of all the evidence.
1033. We separately considered whether our conclusion should be different
given our finding that had the first respondent ought to have revoked the
permission to the second respondent on 16 September 2023 until
arrangements for rotas that did not cross over were made it is likely that
what occurred on Christmas Eve that year would have been avoided. We
concluded that that would not be in accordance with the purpose of the
Act. As the Supreme Court emphasised in FWS each of the protected
characteristics is separate. Whilst it is necessary to consider how to
resolve a conflict between those as to sex and gender reassignment or of

4104864/2024 Page 241
two different and conflicting beliefs, in this regard the question is more
narrow and solely concerns the protected characteristic of belief. In our
view it would not be in accordance with the purpose of the Act to assess
whether the belief was impermissibly manifested by an extraneous matter.
1034. We also considered that the claimant had acted deliberately to be able to
challenge the second respondent whilst they were alone. What she did
was to wait until other members of staff had left the changing room, and
for the second respondent to leave the cubicle, before raising her own
beliefs directly with the second respondent in the manner we have set out.
1035. Whilst the claimant had not been informed as promptly and in the detail
we considered appropriate, and the first respondent did not consider
whether to revoke permission at all, the claimant did not herself raise any
formal grievance under the policy. She is an experienced member of staff
who had access to union advice. She knew, or ought reasonably to have
known, that the first respondent having granted permission to the second
respondent she required to have raised her concerns with the first
respondent as the decision-maker rather than with the colleague to whom
it had been granted, and in any event ought not to have done so in the
manner that she did.
1036. What occurred on Christmas Eve did take place, and it is not we
considered appropriate to expunge it from consideration because of our
findings as to the permission granted by the first respondent to the second
respondent. We therefore did not consider that what the claimant said
during the incident at that point required to be entirely disregarded. The
comments were in our view part of the factual matrix to consider when
determining whether the claimant’s claims under the Act succeeded or not.
1037. We address the issues over the proportionality of the treatment separately
in relation to each matter founded on by the claimant below, as the
circumstances in each case are different.
Evidence from Ms Forstater and Mx Valentine
1038. We turn to address the evidence from Ms Forstater and Mx Valentine,
which the parties had described as “research evidence”. That is not, so far
as we are aware, a term of law. Nothing was cited to support the use of
that term. It is not skilled evidence as explained below, and the parties
did not suggest that either witness was skilled or expert in that sense. It
was not necessarily inadmissible, given the terms of Rule 41, and until
read and considered the extent to which it might be relevant could not be
assessed, but the weight to attach to it was a different consideration.
1039. We considered the written witness statements comprising the evidence in
chief, the oral evidence of Ms Forstater, the supplementary witness
statement of Mx Valentine, and the contents of the Supplementary Bundle.

4104864/2024 Page 242
The original Bundle contained 58 different documents (the numbering of
the documents was incorrect) with a variety of academic papers,
governmental documents and, documents from organisations appearing
to have an other than impartial view. The documents were from Scotland
in a few instances, England and Wales in more, some were from European
or international organisations such as the United Nations, and others from
the United States of America or other countries such as Sweden and
Finland. Those in the supplementary Bundle added slightly to that total.
1040. In many respects the evidence in the statements was more in the nature
of material for the public debate on wider issues as to what the law should
be, and on occasion it appeared to us to be polemic, rather than evidence
relevant to the issues at an Employment Tribunal.
1041. Opinion evidence was addressed in Walker and Walker on Evidence, Fifth
Edition (“Walker”), which explained the distinction between evidence of
fact, and of belief or opinion. Opinion evidence may be led from what
Walker describes as an ordinary witness (the classification of witnesses is
between ordinary and skilled), and examples of that are given.
Ms Forstater
1042. The statement from Ms Forstater was not presented as impartial evidence,
but specifically as one given in support of the claimant. It had at paragraph
10 an argument as to facts, of which Ms Forstater said that she was
certain. They are however we consider not facts, but expressions of her
opinion. The assertion at 10 (b) for example was “Sex is in general readily
perceptible and is salient to other people.” That we consider cannot be
other than her opinion, for which no support from any document in the
Supplementary Bundle appeared to be referred to in her written witness
statement. It was contradicted by other evidence, and the terms of a Note
issued by EJ Tinnion on 5 January 2025 in relation to the second
respondent. It did not appear to be an assertion related to the second
respondent in particular, but as a more general proposition.
1043. The assertion at (d) had a further series of propositions which were
opinions although presented as facts. They commenced with “Provisions
to maintain relevant spaces and interactions as “same sex” are in order to
protect dignity, privacy and safety are particularly important to women
because:……”. That is both an expression of opinion and raises the
question of what provisions are being referred to. If the 1992 Regulations,
then as discussed they are not within this Tribunal’s jurisdiction, and the
comment appears to be an argument over the policy of the law, or how the
law should be interpreted, neither of which are relevant evidence before
us.
1044. The sub-paragraphs include, by way of example, (ii) “women are in
general more fearful of men than men are of women, for good reason.”

4104864/2024 Page 243
That is again an expression of opinion without cross reference to any
document in the Supplementary Bundle. Sub-paragraph (v) was “unless
rules about single-sex spaces are clearly stated and enforced it leaves
women open to risk of sexual harassment and assault, and makes these
spaces feel unsafe.” That again is an expression of opinion. The witness
statement purports to expand on the comments at paragraph 10 stating
that the facts stated are true. In our view they are not reliable as evidence
from a person not a skilled witness on the propositions that are advanced.
1045. Where there was reference to documentation it is in our view both partial
and incomplete. Part of it is based on research undertaken by Sex Matters,
an organisation of which she is the Chief Executive Officer. It is a
campaigning organisation, as set out in paragraph 4. There is an obvious
risk that that research is impacted by the nature of it, which is not
suggested to be an independent academic study with the controls one
normally expects to see. The reliability of the study is therefore at the least
unclear. There are references to various documents under the heading
“Transition does not change sex” and references to what are termed “male
type crimes.” The argument appears to be made that a person who is a
trans woman, having been assigned male at birth, is at greater risk of
offending, including by committing sexual crimes against women, than a
woman identified as female at birth. What the witness states is “This is not
to say that all men who identify as women are criminals or sex offenders,
in the same way that not all men are criminals or sex offenders. But there
is certainly no reason to think they are less likely to be than other men are,
or that they exhibit female patterns of offending and risk.”
1046. If such an argument is to be made in relation to the propositions in
paragraph 10 of the statement, however, it appears to us that that is the
kind of evidence that can only be accepted by an Employment Tribunal
applying the terms of the overriding objective if given by a skilled witness,
which in Scotland means following the guidance in Kennedy, addressed
below. In our view it would not be dealing with a case fairly or justly to rely
on expressions of opinion from a person campaigning on one side of the
argument on such an issue. We did not consider that the case of Connor
on which the claimant founded, cited above and which indicated that in
some situations evidence which was not expert in nature could be
sufficient, was applicable to such a matter.
1047. Our review of the literature referred to by Ms Forstater reveals that the
broad generalisations she seeks to take from it are not sufficiently
supported by the document or document founded on, both from the terms
of the document and the other documents in relation to the same broad
issue, to be treated as reliable evidence. By way of one example, a
reasonable degree of weight was sought to be attached to the study in
Sweden by Dhejne and others in 2011. It examined a cohort of 324
persons “who underwent sex reassignment surgery and were assigned a

4104864/2024 Page 244
new legal sex between 1973 and 2003.” There were two groups within that
cohort, effectively one prior to 1989 and one after then. The following was
stated “Transsexual individuals were at increased risk of being convicted
for any crime or violent crime after sex reassignment (Table 2); this,
however was only significant in the group who underwent sex
reassignment before 1989.” A section headed “Strengths and limitations
of the study” included that the statistical power was limited.”
1048. One of the documents in the Supplementary Bundle was three pages from
a report by an organisation called Fair Play For Women dated 12
December 2020. It was not complete, in that it referred to an Appendix
which was not included. It referred to statistics from 2018 issued by the
Ministry of Justice and stated that they showed that “half of the people in
prison who declare themselves transgender have been sentenced with
one or more sexual offence.” It then states that there is new data
confirming that the vast majority were born male. What that data is
however is not specified. The 2018 statistics referred to and the new data
which may be 2019 statistics were not, so far as we could ascertain, within
the Supplementary Bundle. They may have been obtained from what
appears to be hyperlinks in the report but it is not appropriate for us to
seek out evidence not presented by the parties.
1049. In our view, having read all of the documents, there is very far from
sufficient reliable evidence to establish as a fact that a trans woman who
is legally and biologically male is a greater risk to any person assigned
female at birth within a changing room environment at a workplace than
another woman assigned female at birth.
1050. Some of the documents referred to themselves refer to the need for further
research. Whether that is appropriate is not for this Tribunal to say, but we
do consider that what has been presented to us from Ms Forstater is not
evidence we can regard as reliable. She is of course fully entitled to hold
her views, and to express them, and to campaign about them, but as
evidence before us we do not consider that it can be relied upon.
1051. We note that as the claimant did not wish to cross-examine Mx Valentine,
the evidence given by that witness, so far as was relevant, was not
challenged. That included what amounted to disputes with Ms Forstater
over some of her evidence. By way of example, Mx Valentine stated in
relation to what was described as the second issue, following numbered
paragraph 16, under the second bullet point
“There is no evidence that policies that allow trans people to access
changing rooms and toilets in line with their gender identities
decreases the safety of, or increases the risk of violence faced by,
others (McKay et al, Hasenbash et al, Barnet et al, Scottish
Government paragraphs 17 and 19 – 22 of my statement below)”.

4104864/2024 Page 245
1052. The Scottish Government research was referenced at paragraphs 21 and
22 of the witness statement of Mx Valentine. That evidence was not
disputed by the claimant because of the absence of cross examination,
although it is in direct contradiction to the arguments put forward by Ms
Forstater in her statement and oral evidence.
1053. There is a further difficulty with the evidence which is in our view
highlighted by the terms of the Statement of Truth which the statement
included. It included standard words as set out below but is not what the
witness had done. Her written witness statement went very far beyond that
descriptor, and included reference to the matters we have addressed
above. The solicitor has provided written confirmation of compliance with
the Practice Direction notwithstanding the disparity between the content
of the written witness statement and what we consider to be the
requirements of the Practice Direction. We address this further below, as
it is a matter relevant to both of these witnesses, although the detail in
each case is different.
Mx Valentine
1054. We turn to the evidence of Mx Valentine, which is in a similar context to
that of Ms Forstater in that they (using Mx Valentine’s preferred pronouns)
work for the Equality Network which includes advancing and promoting
the rights of trans people, and Mx Valentine is a trans person. There is no
reference to academic qualifications. The statement includes an analysis
of risks faced by trans people, but the relevance of that general evidence
to the case before us is at best unclear. There is a reference to a lack of
evidence of allowing trans people to access sex-segregated spaces
increasing the risk of violence to others, which is supported by reference
to one paper by McKay and others published in 2017. What was provided
in the Supplementary Bundle however was a single page abstract of that
paper, rather than the full paper, which abstract in any event referred to
the need for further studies. It did not appear to us that we could safely
place reliance on that single page (it was also referred to in an Annexe but
that did not materially add to the abstract itself).
1055. There was also reference to a survey in 2024 conducted by Scottish
Trans, which appears to be an organisation Mx Valentine is a member of
from the use of the words “we conducted” in relation to the survey and
report. That focussed on the experiences of some trans people in relation
to crime, or harassment and abuse, including in public toilets. Whilst the
circumstances of the events between the claimant and second respondent
are relevant we did not consider that the results of such a survey, which is
not suggested to be an academic study with the controls one normally
expects to see, are reliable as evidence before us.
1056. There was reference to a number of other studies in the written witness
statement, which included Scottish Government internal research from

4104864/2024 Page 246
November 2019, which included the comment that “No evidence was
identified to support the claim that trans women are more likely than
cisgender women to sexually assault other women in women-only spaces.
This lack of evidence is reiterated by other sources.” It was however a
literature search of existing publications, which appeared to produce
thirteen documents under the heading “references” some but not all of
which were in the Supplementary Bundle.
1057. Whilst the conclusion of no evidence may be controversial, given the
reliance by some on the Dhejne and others report to which reference is
made above, that the Scottish Government (or those acting on its
instructions) had not identified evidence did to a very small extent support
the view we formed that there was insufficient evidence led before us in a
manner we could accept to make a positive finding of fact, although that
conclusion would have been reached had Mx Valentine’s evidence not
been before us. For very largely the same reasons as for the evidence of
Ms Forstater, albeit from the other end of the spectrum of views between
gender critical and trans supporting beliefs, we did not regard the evidence
of Mx Valentine to be sufficiently reliable to make positive findings in fact,
nor did we consider that the case of Connor was applicable for the same
reasons as given in respect of Ms Forstater.
1058. There was reference to a number of international documents in relation to
gender identity. It was not clear to us on what basis those documents
would be of assistance to us in our determinations. We must apply the law
as we find it to be. We do not make that law. It did not appear to us that
those documents were an aid to construction of the legislation before us.
1059. The confirmation part of the witness statement was not the same as the
Statement of Truth given by Ms Forstater. Mx Valentine had amended the
standard wording to reflect perhaps a different view of what the purpose
of the statement was. It has a confirmation section commencing:
“I understand that the purpose of this witness statement is to
present the findings and conclusions of my research. This
statement is based solely on my professional knowledge,
experience, and the research I have carried out. I have not been
asked or encouraged by anyone to include in this statement
anything that is not, to the best of my ability and understanding,
an accurate representation of my research, findings and
conclusions.”
1060. The solicitor has provided written confirmation of compliance with the
Practice Direction notwithstanding the difference of terminology used
between the statement and the terms of that Direction. There is in our view
no warrant for doing so within the terms of the Direction itself. The
amended wording does not comply with the Practice Direction to which we
now turn.

4104864/2024 Page 247
The role of a skilled (expert) witness and the Practice Direction
1061. The comments about the wording of the Statement of both of those
witnesses in our view highlights an issue in regard to the evidence
presented by them. The Practice Direction excludes from its ambit
evidence from an expert witness, such that for those witnesses the terms
of the Direction would not necessarily be appropriate. But these two
witnesses have not been presented as expert witnesses.
1062. Rule 41 states inter alia that rules as to admissibility of evidence do not
apply in the Tribunal. The overriding objective includes dealing with a case
fairly and justly, and avoiding unnecessary formality. We were however
concerned that what was presented initially as two witnesses giving
evidence of fact in the form of research papers, governmental studies and
other material of a similar nature were to a material extent giving their
opinions, providing selective material to support their views on matters
related to sex and gender, and to a material extent purporting to act as if
skilled or expert witnesses (skilled being the term used in the case in the
Supreme Court referred to below, and expert being the term used in
English cases, although the term is also used in Scotland).
1063. The EAT has addressed the issue of expert evidence in Tribunals. In
England the Civil Procedure Rules (“CPR”) have detailed provisions on
experts, including that the evidence is permitted where reasonably
required to resolve the proceedings, that it requires the approval of the
court, and in many cases there may be a requirement to instruction a
single expert jointly. The EAT has applied principles from the CPR to
proceedings in England and Wales such as in De Keyser Ltd v Wilson
[2001] IRLR 324 and Morgan v Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University
Local Health Board [2020] ICR 1043 in which it held that it was
appropriate for the Tribunal to apply the test in Rule 35.1 of the CPR when
considering whether to grant permission to lead expert evidence.
1064. The CPR do not apply in Scotland. The rules of procedure in the Scottish
civil courts are materially different, and for example there is no
requirement to seek court authority to lead skilled witness evidence in the
Act of Sederunt (Sheriff Court Ordinary Cause Rules) 1993, although as a
matter of practice the court can exclude proposed evidence if not relevant
to the issues before it.
1065. We consider that a Tribunal in this jurisdiction should have regard to the
Supreme Court decision in Kennedy v Cordia Services LLP 2016 SC
(UKSC) 59. That the law in the two jurisdictions is different in this respect
was commented on in Tesco Stores Ltd v Element and others [2025]
EAT 26 in which the EAT distinguished Kennedy in an appeal from an
English Tribunal on the basis that it was not binding in England and Wales
as it was a Supreme Court decision in a Scottish appeal. The EAT in that

4104864/2024 Page 248
case derived assistance from the CPR and related authority. In our view,
taking an equivalent approach, an Employment Tribunal in Scotland
derives assistance from Kennedy, rather than cases such as De Keyser
and the provisions of the CPR.
1066. In Kennedy Lord Reed and Lord Hodge gave a joint speech which
included explaining the differences in procedure between the two
jurisdictions, and addressed the law in Scotland in regard to such
evidence. The speech included the following:
“Experts can and often do give evidence of fact as well as opinion
evidence. A skilled witness, like any non-expert witness, can give
evidence of what he or she has observed if it is relevant to a fact in
issue. An example of such evidence in this case is Mr Greasly's
[the skilled witness for the pursuer] evidence of the slope of the
pavement on which Miss Kennedy lost her footing. There are no
special rules governing the admissibility of such factual evidence
from a skilled witness.
Unlike other witnesses, a skilled witness may also give evidence
based on his or her knowledge and experience of a subject-matter,
drawing on the work of others, such as the findings of published
research or the pooled knowledge of a team of people with whom
he or she works. Such evidence also gives rise to threshold
questions of admissibility, and the special rules that govern the
admissibility of expert opinion evidence also cover such expert
evidence of fact…….”
1067. The following extracts are also we consider relevant:
“….. a skilled person can give expert factual evidence either by itself
or in combination with opinion evidence. There are in our view four
considerations which govern the admissibility of skilled evidence:
(i) whether the proposed skilled evidence will assist the court in its
task; (ii) whether the witness has the necessary knowledge and
experience; (iii) whether the witness is impartial in his or her
presentation and assessment of the evidence; and (iv) whether
there is a reliable body of knowledge or experience to underpin the
expert's evidence. All four considerations apply to opinion
evidence, although, as we state below, when the first consideration
is applied to opinion evidence the threshold is the necessity of such
evidence. The four considerations also apply to skilled evidence of
fact, where the skilled witness draws on the knowledge and
experience of others rather than or in addition to personal
observation or its equivalent……

4104864/2024 Page 249
An expert must explain the basis of his or her evidence when it is
not personal observation or sensation……….expert witnesses
cannot usurp the functions of the jury or judge sitting as a jury…..
The skilled witness must demonstrate to the court that he or she
has relevant knowledge and experience to give either factual
evidence, which is not based exclusively on personal observation
or sensation, or opinion evidence…….
If a party proffers an expert report which on its face does not comply
with the recognised duties of a skilled witness to be independent
and impartial, the court may exclude the evidence as
inadmissible…..”
1068. Whilst that case was about the admissibility of evidence in civil
proceedings, and the Tribunal considers matters through the lens of the
2024 Rules of Procedure, we consider that the guidance from those
remarks is strongly persuasive. Whilst the claimant argued that Ms
Forstater was not presented as an expert witness, in our view that is
essentially what she was doing. She was giving evidence on matters of
opinion dressed up as matters of fact. They were not what she had done
herself, or had seen or heard others do or say. The respondents similarly
appeared to argue that Mx Valentine was not an expert witness but had
been led in response to the evidence from Ms Forstater.
1069. In AW v Greater Glasgow Health Board [2017] CSIH 58 the Inner House
addressed the issue of expert evidence and how it is to be assessed. The
context was a claim of clinical negligence pursued in the Outer House. It
included the following comments:
“Expert evidence is never evidence of primary facts; it invariably
proceeds on versions of the primary facts, sometimes including
matters of inference, that are derived from the evidence of the
witnesses of fact. The task of the expert is to assess that primary
evidence and come to a view as to certain specific matters that are
relevant to the outcome of the litigation……In every case however
the views of the expert witnesses as to the application of a legal
test are not binding on the court. Instead the judge must evaluate
the expert evidence as a whole…..
In evaluating expert evidence, both a judge at first instance and an
appellate court are in our opinion entitled to apply ordinary
standards of logic and common sense……That will frequently
involve consideration of literature in the field, but that literature must
itself be scrutinized carefully to discover how soundly it is based
and to determine whether it is indeed relevant to the particular case
under consideration…..

4104864/2024 Page 250
[after referring to two cases one of which was Kennedy] in
assessing expert evidence courts should have regard to the
explanations that are given for the views advanced, rather than to
the mere fact that a view is widely held, or the apparent distinction
of the person expressing the view. Critical assessment of the
reasoning underlying expert evidence, and of the premises on
which it is based, is essential.”
1070. That is in our view guidance on how such expert or skilled evidence where
presented should be assessed that is relevant in an Employment Tribunal,
and importantly emphasises that even with such evidence critical
assessment of it is necessary. That applies in our view with even more
force where the evidence does not meet the Kennedy criteria.
1071. The evidence of both witnesses we considered not to be reliable, and did
not assist us (save for one aspect), for the following reasons:
(i) There are only two categories of witness, those who are skilled or
expert, and those who are not (sometimes called ordinary
witnesses). That is clear from Kennedy, and the comment in
Walker. It is in our view of no weight for these witnesses to give
evidence of opinion as if they were expert, as the Supreme Court
held above in the phrase commencing “unlike other witnesses”.
There is no third category of research witness. Whilst these are
provisions from the civil courts, it appears to us that they also apply
to evidence before the Tribunal under the overriding objective.
(ii) We were not satisfied that either witness had the necessary
knowledge or experience such that their evidence was of
assistance to the Tribunal. Ms Forstater had a degree in agriculture.
Mx Valentine’s academic or professional qualifications were not
given.
(iii) Neither witness was impartial, on the contrary each was highly
partial and had taken a clear position on the issues of sex and
gender reassignment and matters related to those issues being
considered.
(iv) We did not consider that we had evidence that there is a reliable
body of knowledge or experience to underpin the evidence either
gave. The review of the Supplementary Bundle indicated to us that
there remains a dispute over the entire area of what may be
summarized as the gender critical debate. Statistics are disputed.
At times they are simply unclear, for example whether a trans
woman was included within categories of male or female and if so
which of those. Much of the material is from countries outwith Great
Britain, and the extent to which the conditions in those countries is
or is not broadly equivalent to those in Great Britan not clear. Some

4104864/2024 Page 251
of the material is far from recent. Where there are governmental
statistics or similar the concerns are of course alleviated but the
same concerns over the lack of clarity of the data and what each
category does nor does not include remains, as does what if
anything to infer from such data. Although a decision in the context
of the criminal law, where the underpinning is not sufficient the
evidence is not reliable: Young v HMA [2013] HCJAC 145.
(v) It is possible that part of the evidence could have been relevant for
certain issues such as in relation to indirect discrimination. But in
that context we did not consider that any of it was sufficiently clear
and reliable as to be a proper basis to make a finding in fact, for
example on the issue of group disadvantage as we address below.
Material from Ms Forstater’s organisation and the surveys it
conducted was in our view obviously liable to be materially distorted
by those liable to be responding to questions raised, who were
more likely to support its aims and objectives, such as not to be
reliable as an indicator of views held in the population at large, and
the female population specifically, and it had no bearing on the
groups of staff relevant for PCPs 1 and 2 as we address below
more fully.
(vi) The evidence does not meet the critical assessment test referred
to by the Inner House. Much of it is by way of assertion of a view.
There is a wholescale failure to provide clear and convincing
argument to support the views expressed. The evidence was on
matters far removed from those which relate to events participated
in by the witness, or from what they had seen or heard. Such
opinion evidence is regularly given in Tribunals by those who are
not expert or skilled in the legal sense, for example on whether what
had happened amounted to gross misconduct, or whether the
penalty of dismissal was reasonable. Doing so is evidence which
the Tribunal can and does regularly consider, but in no sense is
bound by. The matters in respect of which these witnesses gave
their evidence however is not of that kind.
1072. The Practice Direction on the use of written witness statements in
Scotland states that the evidence of the witness [after addressing more
practical matters] should only be “about matters of fact of which the
witness has personal knowledge (which can include what they were told
by another person) that are relevant to the issues to be determined at the
hearing.”
1073. In our view they were each not giving that form of evidence from their
personal knowledge. The use of the word “personal” in our view is
significant in this context. Paragraph 29 sets out the requirement for
making a statement, which includes with the following:

4104864/2024 Page 252
“I understand that the purpose of this witness statement is to set
out matters of fact of which I have personal knowledge. This
witness statement does set out only my personal knowledge and
recollection, in my own words.
I have not been asked or encouraged by anyone to include in this
statement anything that is not, to the best of my ability and
recollection, my own account, in my own words, of events I
witnessed or matters of which I have personal knowledge. ,,,,,”
1074. Ms Forstater’s evidence went far beyond such constraints, as did Mx
Valentine’s who also did not apply the wording from the Practice Direction
but an amended version of it which is not consistent with it. A material part
of the evidence of each of them appeared to the Tribunal to be more suited
to consideration in a political or other forum. Whilst therefore the Tribunal
considered the evidence given, including spending very lengthy periods of
time reading and considering their written statements, Ms Forstater’s oral
evidence, and the contents of the Supplementary Bundle with its additional
documents, it came to the conclusion that the evidence of each and of the
documents within that Bundle did not assist it in determining any of the
issues, save in so far as reference was made to government statistics or
reports.
Answers on the issues
1075. The Tribunal dealt with each of the issues identified by the parties as
follows, with some changes in the wording from the list of issues drafted
by the parties as explained below:
Harassment under Section 26 of the Equality Act 2010 (“EqA”)
(i) Did R2, when using the female changing room on the three
occasions referred to at paragraphs 7,9 and 12 to 15 of the Form
ET1 Paper Apart, engage in unwanted conduct relating to the
relevant protected characteristic within the meaning of S.26 (1)
EqA?
1076. The issue as framed by the parties uses the word “the” and not that of “a”
prior to protected characteristic. The section uses the latter, and the issue
is amended to that effect. The protected characteristic relied on is sex.
That for belief is addressed separately below.
1077. There is no dispute that the second respondent used the female changing
room on three occasions when the claimant was present and aware of the
second respondent being there. To the extent that there is a dispute that
the act of the second respondent entering and using the female changing
room to change clothes was unwanted conduct from the perspective of
the claimant, as she considered the claimant to be a male person not
entitled to use the female changing room, that it violated her dignity and

4104864/2024 Page 253
she felt intimidated and embarrassed by that happening, we accept the
claimant’s evidence on that.
1078. The next issue in dispute focusses on whether the use by the second
respondent of the changing room was related to a relevant protected
characteristic. That issue starts with consideration of whether the question
is the sex of the claimant, that of the second respondent or simply the
protected characteristic of sex in more general terms. It appeared to us
that the statute made sense only if it was the third of those possible
meanings, as the section uses the indefinite article. That is in our view the
import of the Supreme Court decision in FWS, particularly in paragraph
255
1079. The protected characteristic of sex is defined in section 11 as a reference
to a man or a woman. “Related to” is a term of wide import, but not without
limits, as the review of authority above sets out. The case law does not
always reveal a clearly consistent pattern, but to emphasise that it is an
area where context and the facts and circumstances of the case are
particularly important. We have concluded that the use of the changing
room by the second respondent when the claimant was also present was
unwanted conduct related to a protected characteristic, sex, for the
following reasons:
(i) Sex is a binary concept, with all persons either female or male under
the 2010 Act, and the claimant and second respondent did not share
sex on that binary.
(ii) The incident was within the female changing room, which the claimant
had a reasonable expectation of being able to use with female
members of staff from the sign on the door unless others had been
permitted to do so by the first respondent lawfully under the 2010 Act.
(iii) Permission was given to the second respondent as the second
respondent was a trans woman, identifying as a woman, and the
second respondent acted on that permission.
(iv) The claimant and those within it used the space primarily for changing
their clothes. They were on occasion in a state of partial undress.
(v) The bodies of males and females are different, each sex sharing the
same physiological attributes with those of their sex save for extremely
rare exceptions.
(vi) The claimant considered the second respondent to be a male person
from visible appearance, and had a reasonable basis for that belief.

4104864/2024 Page 254
(vii) There was no evidence of the second respondent’s physiological
attributes of sex being other than male.
1080. This issue, as modified, is answered in the affirmative.
(ii) Did R2 engage in unwanted conduct of a sexual nature within the
meaning of S.26 (2) EqA in using the female changing room on the
three occasions referred to at paragraphs 7,9 and 12 to 15 of the
Form ET1 Paper Apart?
1081. In our view there was no evidence that we accepted that could constitute
conduct of a sexual nature. The words “sexual nature” are not defined in
the Act. There is some limited assistance from the Code. Sexual
harassment requires in our view some sexual element to the harassment,
not just the protected characteristic of sex under section 11. It connotes
an element of sexual gratification or similar on the part of the harasser,
and some form of perception of a sexual element to the harassment by
the victim.
1082. On the first occasion the second respondent entered the changing room
when the claimant was present the claimant was partly undressed, but
there was no evidence we accepted that the second respondent did so on
that or on the second occasion in any way that could be regarded as
having given it any sexual element. There was no evidence of the second
respondent doing so for any sexual purpose, on the contrary the clear
evidence, which we accepted, was that the second respondent did so after
the grant of permission, and in order simply to change before or after a
shift. That was an entirely normal and unexceptional act, and had no
sexual element to it of any kind.
1083. The claimant relies on the second respondent’s removal of clothing as she
perceived it to be in relation to the third occasion on Christmas Eve, but
we did not consider her evidence on that reliable. The second respondent
was fully clothed throughout their exchange, having changed into casual
clothing before it commenced. The second respondent latterly put on a
jacket, but that does not in our view affect the analysis. The factual basis
of this claim is not established. There was nothing of any form of sexual
element in the exchange between them, and in so far as the claimant
considered that there was her perception to that effect was we considered
not reasonable. As she was aware, the reason for the second
respondent’s presence in the changing room was the permission granted
by the first respondent to someone with the protected characteristic of
gender reassignment. In so far as clothing had been or could be changed
that followed from that permission.
1084. To the extent that the claimant had the perception that the harassment
was sexual, that perception was not in our view reasonable. This issue is

4104864/2024 Page 255
answered in the negative and the claim under section 26(2) is therefore
dismissed.
(iii) If the answer to questions 1 or 2 above is ‘yes’, did that conduct
have the purpose or effect of violating the claimant’s dignity or
creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating, or offensive
environment for her pursuant to section 26(1) (b) and (2) (b) taking
into account the matters set out at section 26(4) EqA?
1085. We considered that the evidence is clear that the second respondent did
not have as a purpose creating the form of environment referred to in the
section. The claimant alleged that that was indeed the purpose, but we
rejected that. The second respondent’s purpose was simply to live life in
the sex and gender that the second respondent identified as having. Nor
did the first respondent have such a purpose when granting the permission
it did. Its purpose was compliance with the general policies on equality and
diversity, as Ms Bumba and Dr Searle understood them.
1086. The next question is whether the second respondent accessing the female
changing room on the basis of the permission given by the first respondent
had the effect of violating the claimant’s dignity or creating an intimidating,
hostile, degrading, humiliating, or offensive environment. The question of
effect does not depend to any extent on the motive of the person alleged
as the harasser.
1087. On this point, as to violation of dignity or creating the environment referred
to, as outlined above we considered that the evidence of the claimant as
to her own perception was credible and reliable. Her view was that she
was sharing a changing room, in a state of partial undress on 25 October
2023, with someone she regarded as male, and that doing so violated her
dignity, and was intimidating for her. It was supported by the fact of the
informal issue she raised with her line manager which she did shortly after
the first incident, and the message sent not long afterwards to her friend.
Her comment to the second respondent at the Christmas Eve incident was
that she found the second respondent’s presence intimidating. Although
she said that she would raise the matter formally, she did not in fact do so
by internal grievance, and instead raised a Claim at this Tribunal. She told
her family that there had been an incident later on Christmas Day 2023,
and their evidence supports her own evidence as to the feeling of
intimidation and distress from that incident. The evidence was not that she
was scared, however.
1088. The claimant’s reaction to the second respondent being in the female
changing room was we concluded genuinely one of a sense of violation of
dignity, and of intimidation in circumstances of embarrassment and also
in the context of her having suffered what she considered to be sexual
abuse when a teenager, which created the kind of environment that falls
within the section. It was not of the minor or trivial extents that are to be

4104864/2024 Page 256
excluded from protection. Whilst embarrassment is not within the statutory
terminology of the Act it is relevant to the assessment of the impact on the
claimant. There is some support for the claimant’s position from the
Supreme Court comments in FWS that many women might reasonably
object to the presence of a trans woman in the changing room. Had the
claimant only felt embarrassment that in our view would not have been
sufficient, but it went beyond that so as to fall within the terms of the
section.
1089. We then considered the other provisions of section 26(4), which are the
other circumstances and the reasonableness of the claimant’s perception.
The claimant’s principal written submission argued that what the second
respondent had done was “persisting in invading what should have been
a female-only space in the teeth of C’s clear discomfort…..” We did not
consider that to be an accurate description of matters. The second
respondent had permission to use that space. There was no invasion of it
as it has been characterised. The claimant had previously avoided using
it at the same time as the second respondent but that we consider was
properly taken by the second respondent as how the claimant wished to
deal with the matter. The claimant did make her discomfort about that
known at the time of the Christmas Eve incident, but raising it with the
second respondent not the first respondent who had granted the
permission was not the appropriate way to do so as addressed above, and
in light of the manner by which she did so the second respondent had little
practical option other than to engage with her. The second respondent did
so in a manner we consider unobjectionable in all the circumstances.
1090. We have held above that the first respondent has not discharged the
burden of proof that the continued grant of permission was the least
intrusive measure and an appropriate balance of the rights and interests
of the claimant and respondents for the period from 16 September 2023
to the return to work on 14 April 2024. What the first respondent did, after
the matter was considered including how to manage shift patterns, was to
find a solution, which was that the claimant and second respondent did
not work on shifts that crossed over.
1091. In light of all the circumstances we have concluded that the claimant’s
perception of harassment from the second respondent using the changing
room, because of the permission given, on 25 October 2023 and over
Christmas Eve that year was reasonable in so far as it relates to the first
respondent’s grant of permission. The perception of harassment that is
reasonable in our view arose from the first respondent not meeting the
Bank Mellat tests.
1092. For the dates arising before and after that period the claimant’s perception
of harassment was we consider not reasonable under that sub-section.
The grant of permission for the reasons given above did meet those tests.

4104864/2024 Page 257
The claimant did not suffer personally any violation of dignity or
intimidation or similar for the period after the return to work. Putting it
simply she and the second respondent were not from that point on in the
changing room together, and there was no realistic prospect that they
would given the changed rotas. To the extent that the claimant had the
perception that permission should not be given to the second respondent
to use the changing room even when she would not be present in it and
that that was harassment of her under the section, her perception we
regarded as not reasonable. The section concerns harassment of a
person, not the harassment of others, in our view. It is an individual matter.
The claimant was the only person complaining to the first respondent, and
her complaint had at that point been effectively addressed in our view.
1093. So far as what the second respondent did on those two dates (25 October
and Christmas Eve 2023) is concerned in our view there was nothing said
or done (beyond acting on the permission given by entering the changing
room) by the second respondent during either of the incidents that would
cause a reasonable person to feel harassed within the terms of section
26. The second respondent responded to the claimant’s comments during
the Christmas Eve incident in an appropriate manner, acknowledging the
concerns expressed by the claimant, and stating that there were other
processes to address them. There was no actual threat to the claimant’s
safety from the second respondent being present, and the second
respondent did not act in any way which would give the claimant
reasonable cause to consider that there was. In her evidence she
accepted that she had not felt scared at the time.
1094. The claimant argued that the second respondent could simply have left,
and that latterly the second respondent was nearer to the door so could
do so. In our view that is not a reasonable interpretation of what happened.
The claimant initiated the conversation, pursued it, continued to contradict
the second respondent, and did not until the very end accept the comment
that this was not the time or place to raise the matter. In our view that did
not give the second respondent a reasonable opportunity to leave without,
as the second respondent said in evidence, that then being raised as a
failure to listen or similar.
1095. The claimant also argued that the second respondent being a male was a
greater threat to her than a biological woman would be. We did not
consider that such a perception was reasonable if it had been held. There
had been nothing done or said by the second respondent on any of the
interactions between the claimant and second respondent about which we
heard evidence that could give anyone in the claimant’s circumstances a
reasonable perception of there being a threat to her safety. In any event,
it was we considered contrary to her in fact having such a perception that
she delayed making any comment until after the other two staff members
had left and waited deliberately until the second respondent came out of

4104864/2024 Page 258
the cubicle. The claimant could simply have left the room, or entered the
other cubicle which was vacant, had she genuinely had any sense of lack
of safety. That she did not do so indicated to us that she did not feel a
sense of threat from the presence of a male as her submission sought to
characterise it.
1096. We address further below the issue of the second respondent’s liability in
law. For the reasons given above, and below in relation to the second
respondent, we answer this question in the affirmative in relation to the
first respondent to the extent set out above, and otherwise in the negative,
including in the negative in relation to the second respondent.
(iv) Is the claimant’s objection to R2’s use of the female changing room
an aspect of her protected belief?
1097. The evidence was clear that the claimant did object to the second
respondent being present in the female changing room and that that was
a part of her belief, which is described by the shorthand of gender critical
or sex realist. The issue in law however is whether the use of the changing
room by the second respondent was related to the claimant’s protected
characteristic of belief, which is addressed in the issue below. To the
extent however that this issue is relevant, it is answered in the affirmative.
(v) Did R1 engage in unwanted conduct relating to the claimant’s
protected gender critical belief and in the case of (f) also, or
alternatively sex) by:-
a) Placing her on special leave on 30 December 2023;
aa. Making her the subject of the emails referred to at 15A and 17A
of the ET1
b) Suspending her on 4 January 2024;
bb. Referring her to the NMC on or around 5 January 2024 and
telling her colleagues that she had been referred to the NMC as
described at 17A of the ET1
c) Treating R2’s complaint as meriting a disciplinary investigation;
d) Continuing her suspension on 2 February 2024;
e) Seeking to persuade her, at a meeting on 7 March 2024, to return
to a different workplace from the Victoria Hospital;
f) Refusing to guarantee that men or R2 would not be permitted to
use the women’s changing room in its A&E department;
g) Extending her suspension pending agreement on the shifts that
she was to return to;

4104864/2024 Page 259
h) Insisting that she must return to work initially on day shifts in
order to enable her interactions with colleagues and patients to be
supervised by senior staff;
i) Intimating, on 28 March 2024, that part of the investigation related
to an allegation about the care of patients;
j) Failing to progress the disciplinary investigation with reasonable
promptness; and
k) Prohibiting her from discussing her legal claims/issues of
concern in the workplace.
1098. We shall consider whether the first respondent has established that the
detriment in each case was not related to the claimant’s belief, but the
impermissible manifestation of belief. It is we consider most convenient to
answer that point at this stage rather than as the first respondent proposes
in the amendment to the List of Issues, although it is largely a matter of
placement in the list.
1099. In addressing this question Higgs has made clear the distinction between
manifesting beliefs permissibly, and doing so impermissibly or as
otherwise described objectionably. There is a reasonable degree of
latitude in manifesting beliefs. Constraints on doing so must not be so
great as to deprive a person of the ability to do so. It is only where the
manner of manifesting beliefs is objectionable to a sufficient extent that it
is necessary to protect the rights of others that it is not protected. Where
the line is to be drawn between that which is permissible and that which is
objectionable depends on all the circumstances.
1100. The court gave a warning that the Tribunal requires to be alert to cases
where the reason advanced by the employer for the treatment of the
claimant hid the true reason of a mindset against the belief held. That in
essentials is what the claimant argued, which was that her belief was
regarded as heretical and so contrary to those of the first respondent in
promoting the rights of trans persons within the context of its equality and
diversity policies that she was punished for expressing them. This was
said by the Court of Appeal:
“It is worth clarifying one point that came up in the submissions
before us. There will be cases where the treatment complained of
by the employee was ostensibly on the ground of conduct which
manifested a religious or other belief but where it is found that the
real reason was an animus against the belief in question. Such a
finding may be straightforwardly because the employer’s account
of its reasons is disbelieved; but it may also be because, as I put it
in McFarlane v Relate Avon Ltd [2009] UKEAT 0106/09/3011,
[2010] ICR 507, it is in the circumstances of the particular case

4104864/2024 Page 260
“impossible to see any basis for the objection other than an
objection to the belief which it manifests” so that “[the employer’s
claim] to be acting on the grounds of the former but not the latter
may be regarded as a distinction without a difference” (see para.
18). Neither kind of case is in truth a manifestation case at all,
because the employer is motivated simply by the fact that the
employee holds the belief. In a manifestation case proper the
employer genuinely has no objection to the employee holding the
belief and is motivated only by the conduct which constitutes its
manifestation. Most claims of discrimination on the ground of
religion or belief are likely to be genuine manifestation cases of this
kind.”
1101. In addition to the onus falling on the first respondent following the analysis
in Higgs, there are evidential reasons for the onus to fall on the first
respondent which we consider require to be taken into account in
assessing whether or not the onus is discharged. That arises from
(i) the first respondent’s substantial breaches of the document order, and
the late provision of a large number of relevant documents
(ii) prejudgment of the matter by Ms Davidson in her emails to the second
respondent, she being for a period the investigator,
(iii) prejudgment of the allegations by a large number of the first
respondent’s other employees, many of them senior managers to whom
the complaints or one of them were sent, who indicated support for the
second respondent before any investigation of the allegation had been
undertaken
(iv) the manner in which the allegations of patient care were addressed, in
particular that they were not articulated in the investigation process
initially, were mentioned for the first time by Ms Myles in a different context,
and had at best for the first respondent little evidential base at any stage
(v) the disparity between the messages to keep the second respondent
informed of the investigation process as against the messages sent to the
claimant to do so
(vi) what was submitted to the Tribunal in the early part of the Final Hearing
to the effect that Ms Davidson was not the investigator which was not
accurate,
(vii) breaches of the policy as to the investigation in not providing initially
the details of the allegations made against the claimant, they not being
provided until 12 April 2024 and then later changing, and the investigation
not being conducted in a timely manner despite that being the term of the
policy. That lack of timeliness included the delay from Ms Davidson being
appointed investigator when she was involved in the earlier incidents and

4104864/2024 Page 261
clearly had a conflict of interest as she was a witness and had made or at
least passed on a decision on the matter complained about by the
claimant, that being known to Mr Doyle who in our view should have
intervened early in the process to address that but did not, and he did not
appear before us to explain that, and from the email from Dr Currer of 5
January 2024 which stated in terms that Ms Davidson should not conduct
the investigation, Ms Davidson having been one of those to whom it was
sent and there being no evidence from her that she did not see it as the
first respondent did not produce that email timeously and she was not
recalled,
(viii) The lack of support provided to the claimant after she raised her
concerns on 26 August 2023. She was fully entitled to do so as stated
above. Whilst Ms Bumba had given advice, and there appeared to be a
fairly widespread similar view within the NHS both in Scotland and in
England and Wales, it was or ought reasonably to have been apparent
that the claimant was raising her own belief and arguing that the second
respondent ought not to be given permission to use the female changing
room. The claimant was not however given a clear response either initially
or when she raised it again in October 2023, nor was anything put in
writing. She was not given HR support, or referred to the policies with
regard to the matter – including that for Equality, Diversity and Human
Rights (EDHR). In reality her concerns were brushed off rather than being
adequately considered and responded to. In our view the lack of support
for the claimant was a failure by the first respondent. There ought to have
been a timeous and more full response provided to the claimant, which
included how else she could raise her concerns, with whom and how. She
should have been spoken to by an HR officer of some kind, and given a
copy of the grievance policy as well as the EDHR policy. Had that been
done a more sophisticated process might well have taken place. The lack
of support given to the claimant throughout does stand in stark contrast to
the materially higher level support given to the second respondent after
the Christmas Eve incident both by expressions of that to the second
respondent and by being regularly updated on what was happening. The
legal position is very far from simple. Ms Bumba is not a lawyer. Her advice
was given in good faith. Ms Bumba was not however told of the full details
of the claimant’s complaint to Ms Davidson. Had she been told them we
consider it more likely that she would have sought advice, either within HR
or from the legal department. The first respondent is a very large
organisation with about 10,000 employees. It is part of NHS Scotland
which has a Central Legal Office, now acting for the respondents. The
issue raised by the claimant was one that ought to have been recognised
by the first respondent as a belief worthy of respect and considered in light
of that. It did not appear to us that the first respondent did so.
(ix) the unreasonable length of time the process of investigation took as
addressed separately.

4104864/2024 Page 262
1102. In our view the cumulative effect of these matters is reasonably heavy.
1103. We have found above that the claimant did in part manifest her beliefs in
an impermissible way. We shall consider firstly whether the respondent
has proved that the conduct in each case was because of that
impermissible manifestation of belief, and secondly if so as the first two of
the Bank Mellat tests are we consider established, then apply the
measure and balance tests. We require to address each of the individual
matters separately as each has a different context and circumstance.
a) Placing her on special leave on 30 December 2023;
1104. We consider that the first respondent has proved that this was undertaken
solely because of what the second respondent had complained about,
which in essence was that the belief had been manifested impermissibly.
What was objectionable about the events was the language said to have
been used by the claimant to the extent we have referred to above. Ms
Curran gave evidence on this which we accept. She said that Mr Doyle
had made the decision, and he did not give evidence, but we were
satisfied from the evidence she gave to us on this point. We consider that
at the very least there was sufficient for the first respondent properly to
consider the second respondent’s allegation as a serious one, which if true
could amount to gross misconduct as bullying or harassment or both.
Whilst the step of special leave was an unusual one, for which there is not
basis in a written policy, it was taken because of the seriousness of the
complaint made, and that it was at a time just after Christmas when advice
from HR could not immediately be obtained. Doing so in our view met the
measure test as no less intrusive measure would have met the objective
and it met the balance test in the circumstances.
aa. The email of 29 December 2023
1105. The claimant reserves her position in light of Greasley-Adams, and we
therefore make no finding.
b) Suspending her on 4 January 2024;
1106. We consider that this was undertaken solely because of what the second
respondent had complained about, said to be impermissible manifestation
of the belief in effect, and was not related to the claimant’s belief itself. The
allegation was of a relatively serious level of what could, if true, be bullying
and harassment causing a material level of distress. It could have been
regarded as gross misconduct as we stated above. In essence it was also
a complaint by the second respondent of a breach by the claimant of
section 26 in relation to gender reassignment.
1107. There was a factual issue over whether a written risk assessment had
been carried out or not before that suspension was decided upon. No
written risk assessment was provided in evidence. It had been raised in

4104864/2024 Page 263
email correspondence with Ms Davidson, who suggested that it had been
given to Ms Glancey, but Ms Sinclair-Forrow stated in a reply that there
was a muddling up of that risk assessment with the checklist. On balance
we concluded that the document had not been created, but that Ms
Davidson had conducted a form of mental risk assessment and did
genuinely consider that an issue of patient safety arose as part of her
consideration of whether to suspend. We concluded that she wrongly
thought that the checklist was the risk assessment.
1108. Precisely where those concerns as to patient safety came from was also
not entirely clear. Her evidence was that it came from Ms Curran who had
been told by Dr Searle, and that that was on 31 December 2023. Ms
Curran’s evidence did not support that, and she said that she was not at
work that day. It did appear to us however that Dr Searle had been told of
at least one occasion when the claimant had left a patient when the
second respondent had appeared. It seems to us very likely that that
allegation was verbally transmitted to Ms Davidson by Dr Searle in
discussion.
1109. The material on which to base such a decision was scant. But there was
a reference by the second respondent to an escalation of past behaviours
which had been discussed with Dr Searle, there was also the potential, if
the allegation were true, that a similar comment be made to a patient which
had not been raised at that point with the claimant but we consider was
likely to have been in the mind of Ms Davidson. That is supported by
comments from HR in emails sent around that time.
1110. It is true that the issue of patient safety was not referred to in the meeting
with the claimant, or in the letter confirming suspension sent to her, or the
written reasons for suspension Ms Davidson completed, but on balance
we have accepted Ms Davidson’s evidence.
1111. With the benefit of all the evidence before us, and including that from the
investigation, it is now clear that the alleged patient care matters that were
historic at that point were not fundamentally ones of patient care. There
was no direct evidence that established that patient care was adversely
affected at all. The two matters were not raised contemporaneously, and
the claimant was obviously prejudiced by being asked much later on about
matters. When Ms Ashraf was asked as an independent witness the
evidence was equivocal to an extent but did not support what the second
respondent had said. The second respondent had said about the resus
incident that no names of witnesses were known and appreciated that the
allegation may not go further, and in the mobile phone had recorded that
the missing patient incident was not one of patient safety. It is therefore
not clear why there was a formal allegation as to patient care, rather than
as one of not interacting with a trans woman, later during the investigation
process.

4104864/2024 Page 264
1112. Given that the issue of patient care was part of the reason for suspension
it is not clear why Ms Davidson asked the second respondent to provide a
statement only about the Christmas Eve incident, and not also about the
patient care matters. At that time she was acting as investigator, rather
than as the decision-maker for the suspension with suspension having
been decided on but as suspension was to be reconsidered under the
policy we concluded that best practice was to find out as much as could
be about it as early as possible. That that was not done was a matter we
took into account.
1113. At the stage when suspension was considered there were no statements,
no details in full, and her view that it was part of the reason to suspend are
we conclude was genuine, and not affected to any extent at all by the
claimant’s sex or belief. It was we concluded essentially a prospective risk
as to what may happen in the future. This is also not a binary matter –
both Ms Myles and Ms Davidson, who was supported in her view by others
including Dr Searle and others, can hold reasonable but different views on
this. Ms Davidson and Dr Searle are medical practitioners. Those in HR
did not agree with the decision, and gave advice it appears from the written
material before us that was to the effect that suspension was not
warranted, but the decision was not for HR.
1114. In all the circumstances we have accepted Ms Davidson’s evidence on
this, and concluded that the first respondent had proved that the decision
was not because of the belief held by the claimant or her expression of it,
but from the manner in which she had done so as was alleged, and the
concern over patient care.
1115. The claimant also alleged that suspension needed a better excuse than
the Christmas Eve incident, which could have been managed by avoiding
the parties being on the same shift. That however was not the evidence of
Ms Davidson, which we accepted.
1116. We considered whether a less intrusive measure might have been utilised
which still met the needs of the first respondent but concluded that in light
of the apparent seriousness of the allegations of bullying and harassment
alone that there was not. HR had their view, but that is not determinative,
and both Ms Davidson and Ms Malone were in our view entitled to believe
that suspension was the only appropriate step. That was in the context
that an investigation was required, the circumstances were not fully known
but were believed to include the possibility of patient care having earlier
been impacted to some extent, or may in future be affected if the claimant
repeated what was alleged to have been said. Those were genuine views
that had a reasonable basis at the time of the suspension decision. That
meant that deciding how to proceed was not solely an issue of
ascertaining rotas, but also considering what might happen if the claimant

4104864/2024 Page 265
was not suspended. We concluded that Ms Davidson acted in accordance
with the balance test in suspending, given those circumstances.
bb. The email of 5 January 2024
1117. We understand that the claimant also reserves her position on this email.
We therefore make no finding about it.
c) Treating R2’s complaint as meriting a disciplinary investigation;
1118. The evidence was that Ms Malone decided that an investigation was
required in view of the seriousness of the allegations. She believed that
they could amount to bullying and harassment. We have addressed above
that the complaint could, if true, amount to gross misconduct under the
Conduct Policy, a breach of the Bullying and Harassment Policy, and
amount to harassment under section 26, by the claimant. As the Supreme
Court decision in FWS stressed, those with the protected characteristic of
gender reassignment, such as the second respondent, retain protections
against, inter alia, such harassment. That decision also endorsed the
comments in Forstater that actions including use of non-preferred
pronouns, and other actions might, dependent on the circumstances,
amount to harassment. In essence that is what the second respondent
claimed when raising with the first respondent what the second
respondent alleged had happened. The allegation was materially more
serious than one of misgendering given its terms. In our view given the
allegations made it was obvious that an investigation was required and
there is support for that general view, albeit in different factual
circumstances, in Higgs. We consider that the first respondent has
provide that this was done solely because of what the second respondent
had complained about as impermissible manifestation. Doing so in our
view met the measure test as no less intrusive measure would have met
the objective and it met the balance test in the circumstances.
d) Continuing her suspension on 2 February 2024;
1119. The sole reason for the continuation was that the claimant had not
attended OH at that point. The first respondent had sought that to be
satisfied that the claimant was fit to attend an investigatory interview. That
was standard practice, and there was no connection with issues as to the
belief the claimant had or the issue of manifestation. We consider that that
suffices to determine that particular issue in light of those circumstances.
e) Seeking to persuade her, at a meeting on 7 March 2024, to return
to a different workplace from the Victoria Hospital;
1120. We did not consider that there was anything proved in regard to this
allegation – Ms Myles did not seek to persuade the claimant to return to a
different workplace but mentioned that as an option, as was a matter of
practice. The alleged act of attempted persuasion did not therefore occur.

4104864/2024 Page 266
In any event it was proved to be entirely unconnected to the claimant’s
belief. Doing so in our view met the measure test as no less intrusive
measure would have met the objective and it met the balance test in the
circumstances.
f) Refusing to guarantee that men or R2 would not be permitted to
use the women’s changing room in its A&E department;
1121. The first respondent did refuse to guarantee that men or the second
respondent would not be permitted to use the female changing room. The
claimant believed that the first respondent should have given that
guarantee. From our analysis of the law above there is no legal
requirement under the Act that all trans women be excluded, or that the
second respondent be excluded, from such a facility at work. At this stage
the issue is whether the refusal referred to was related to the claimant’s
belief, or her sex. It was neither. It was solely a decision based on the first
respondent’s view of how it should treat those with the protected
characteristic of gender reassignment, such that they considered, and in
principle could consider, that a biological male with that protected
characteristic could be given permission to use the female changing room
in appropriate circumstances, as could a biological female with the
protected characteristic of gender reassignment in appropriate
circumstances be given permission to use the male changing room.
1122. In our view the first respondent has proved that its decision was solely
taken because what the claimant sought was not its understanding of the
Act, on which we consider they were correct for the reasons given above
(albeit that those are different reasons to those held by the first respondent
at the time). This is therefore addressed separately as it is not a matter of
belief or impermissible manifestation at all in our view, and even if it were,
the decision met the measure test as no less intrusive measure would
have met the objective and it met the balance test in the circumstances.
1123. In relation to the protected characteristic of sex, it was similarly a decision
taken solely on the first respondent’s view as to how to treat those with the
protected characteristic of gender reassignment, and separately it was in
any event not reasonable for the claimant to perceive the refusal as
harassment under section 26(4) in light of the analysis of the law we have
referred to.
g) Extending her suspension pending agreement on the shifts that
she was to return to;
1124. We considered that the first respondent has proved that this was solely
because of the claimant’s impermissible manifestation of belief. There was
a practical matter as to shifts that required to be addressed unrelated to
the belief. Shifts for junior doctors were prepared in six monthly blocks,
and were difficult to change. Those for nurses were prepared separately.

4104864/2024 Page 267
Whilst it took rather a long time there were not simple issues of rota
planning to resolve between a nurse and doctor on different rotas
managed differently, and a difference later resolved over whether the
return on a phased basis would be on day shift or not. We accepted the
first respondent’s evidence on these matters. We did not have before us
in the evidence all of the shifts of the claimant and second respondent for
the relevant periods, essentially between January and April 2024
inclusive, but we consider that there was an obvious advantage of finding
shift patterns whereby the claimant and second respondent did not work
together and would not have a risk of coming into contact. Ms Myles was
clearly doing her best to find such a solution, and to do so as quickly as
was practicable. That was in circumstances where the only complainant
was the claimant, and if the shift patterns could be made to work in that
regard there was no risk of a repeat of the Christmas Eve incident. The
step met the measure test as no less intrusive measure would have met
the objective and it met the balance test in the circumstances.
h) Insisting that she must return to work initially on day shifts in
order to enable her interactions with colleagues and patients to be
supervised by senior staff;
1125. We considered that the first respondent proved that this was solely
because of the impermissible manifestation of belief. We accepted Ms
Myles’ evidence as to this being to ensure that there was a member of the
supervisory staff present with the claimant, which Ms Myles considered
was partly for the claimant’s benefit if any additional issue was said to have
arisen after she returned to work, and partly to ensure that the return to
work went without impact on patient care or other staff. It was in our view
solely to manage the return to work in light of all the circumstances, which
included the on-going investigation. There was no less intrusive measure
that would have met the first respondent’s needs in this regard, and it met
the balance test in our view in the circumstances.
(i) Intimating, on 28 March 2024, that part of the investigation
related to an allegation about the care of patients;
1126. Firstly it is the case that the allegations being discussed within the first
respondent included ones of patient care, and that the message from Ms
Myles was the first intimation of this to the claimant. The details of the
allegation were not provided to the claimant until the formal letter calling
her to an investigation sent later on 12 April 2024. The policy as to this is
that the person complained about should have details of the allegations
sent to them, and that that took well over four months is very surprising
indeed. That should have been undertaken in early January 2024, either
by Ms Davidson or someone else. HR should have made reference to this
in their discussions with Ms Davidson. Ms Myles simply passed to the
claimant her understanding of the matters being investigated, formal

4104864/2024 Page 268
notice of which followed later. The problem arose because the first
respondent had not provided the claimant with notice that this matter was
being investigated when the investigation commenced, which we consider
to be a breach of the Investigations policy.
1127. Secondly as that was a matter under investigation it had the potential to
impact on the arrangements to return to work although once the rotas had
been managed in fact the claimant did return to work at the department.
In our view it was proportionate for Ms Myles to pass this information to
the claimant, not least as she had until then been unaware of it. The patient
care allegations were at that stage part of what was being considered in
the context of lifting suspension, and it was appropriate for the claimant to
be aware of that so that she could make any comment she wished to. That
was particularly relevant where she had been suspended, and that was to
be reconsidered.
1128. It is however remarkable that that is how the claimant was informed of
them. That is so not least as the claimant’s solicitor shortly afterwards
raised the issue with the respondents’ solicitor, who agreed that the
claimant was entitled to clarity. The respondents’ solicitor does not appear
to have given that clarity which in our view the claimant was perfectly
entitled to ask for. No explanation for the lack of response to that request
was given in the evidence. We consider that these further specific factors
should be taken into account when considering whether the first
respondent has discharged the onus.
1129. The claimant argued that neither respondent had any appetite for a
thorough or effective investigation of the resus allegation as they guessed
(first respondent) and knew (second respondent) that it was untrue. We
did not accept that. We considered that it had been mentioned as part of
the background, that there was a genuine belief that patient safety could
be compromised by what was alleged, and there was a genuine if
imperfect attempt to investigate it. The history of the patient care
allegations appearing in the documentation is, as the claimant argued, far
from consistent, but we have concluded that that was because of a less
than competent process of investigation and not as a form of conspiracy.
The allegations were not included in the letter of 12 April 2024. They were
mentioned in a letter of 15 May 2024 but the claimant did not receive it.
They were mentioned but not until July 2024, although the letter doing so
is not specifically challenged by the claimant.
1130. The issue before us refers solely to the comment by Ms Myles on 28 March
2024, and not the later introduction of patient care allegations as a
disciplinary allegation. In our view the lack of clarity over why that patient
care allegation was mentioned then, and the circumstances we describe
about including what was being discussed between those at the first
respondent, at a time when Ms Glancey was formally the investigator but

4104864/2024 Page 269
had not it seems done very much if anything, means that the first
respondent has not discharged the onus on it. We find that the first
respondent has not proved that this was related solely impermissible
manifestation and separately they have not satisfied the measure or
balance tests, although the fault for that was not in our view that of Ms
Myles. She was simply reporting what she was aware of, but when not
aware of the terms of the investigation itself. We consider that for the
claimant to have learned of this aspect of allegations against her in this
manner was a detriment. On this matter we therefore find for the claimant.
j) Failing to progress the disciplinary investigation with reasonable
promptness;
1131. The investigation was not conducted with reasonable promptness, and
doing so was in essentials what the investigations policy required. We
were not satisfied that the explanation for delay was as given by the first
respondent, with time taken to identify who would conduct the
investigation, then meeting a relatively large number of witnesses,
coordinating diaries to do so, and finalising a statement taking
considerably longer than could reasonably be justified. It accounted in our
view for a part of the period but not all of it. We were concerned that the
process took almost a year to complete, which was far longer than the
Tribunal would expect given the circumstances of this case. The
investigation was treated it appears to us as if there was no urgency, when
there was. It should have been conducted far more quickly.
1132. In this regard we did not consider that the first respondent had discharged
the onus on it of establishing that the reason for treatment was the manner
of the manifestation being objectionable rather than the manifestation of
the belief. We did not consider that the treatment of the claimant in this
regard was proportionate. The first period is from 5 January 2024 to 29
February 2024 during which Ms Davidson was, but ought not to have been
as had been recognised by at least some within the first respondent on
that earlier date, the investigator. As noted above Mr Doyle appeared to
us to have sufficient information to know that and ought to have
intervened, and as he did not give evidence to us there is no explanation
to the contrary.
1133. Ms Glancey took over on 29 February 2024. She had a holiday for about
two weeks, but it was not in our view explained why it took until 12 April
2024 to frame the letter to the claimant commencing the process. That
ought to have been done about three months earlier in our view from the
terms of the policy.
1134. There was an apology for the time taken by the respondents’ solicitor at
around the time Ms Glancey took over, and again in the letter of 12 April
2024, but each was vague in what it described as the reason and from
then it took a further period of over seven months. For issues such as

4104864/2024 Page 270
those in this case, and given the resources for an employer of the size of
the first respondent, that requires a materially fuller explanation in our
view. Neither in the letter to the claimant nor in evidence was that given.
1135. We simply did not understand the supposed reasons for all the time taken
thereafter. It was in the context of the claimant’s letter of claim on 15
February 2024 stating that her mental health was being impacted by the
allegations. That is not a surprising matter to have raised. We did not
consider that Ms Sinclair-Forrow’s absences were sufficient to explain the
delays, and in any event it was wholly unclear why another HR person
could not have been brought in. There was a general lack of urgency in
how matters were addressed by the first respondent despite that, and the
various messages from the claimant’s solicitor, as well as at least one
indication of concern for progress from the first respondent’s solicitor.
1136. The length of time was not in our view proportionate. In simple terms it
was far too long, and was unreasonably so. There were not that many staff
to interview, and the explanations for the delays involved were not we
considered to be accepted. We appreciate that the context was an
Emergency Department, that that was busy for all concerned, and shifts
for those involved required to be worked around, together with the terms
of the policy for conducting such an investigation but that does not explain
all this unusually lengthy delay.
1137. This takes us to the allegation of a conspiracy against the claimant as she
expressed a belief as to sex, essentially that a trans woman was not a
woman, that the first respondent did not agree with which we addressed
partly above. It was described by Ms Cunningham as that the claimant had
an heretical view, which we took to mean one contrary to the stated aims
in the EDHR policy and elsewhere both within the first respondent and the
NHS more widely.
1138. We have come to the conclusion that there was no such conspiracy. We
were concerned not just by the widespread failures to comply with the
document order, but also that it was said to us that Ms Davidson had done
in effect nothing of relevance in the investigation, and that documents not
produced were administrative. In fact Ms Davidson was involved in the
investigation until the end of February 2024 and a number of documents
of obvious materiality were provided later. They included the email from
Dr Searle on 29 December 2023 and the email from Dr Currer on 5
January 2024 referring to a small group including those who were
witnesses, that the claimant had been referred to the NMC and passing
information. Matters then took an unduly long period of time.
1139. We have concluded that this was an example of incompetence not
conspiracy. If the first respondent had been seeking to punish the
claimant as alleged, we do not consider it would have been handled in the
manner it was – taking such a time to complete the investigation let alone

4104864/2024 Page 271
reaching a decision which was not disciplinary in character. Suspension
was effected reasonably quickly on the basis of what was alleged, as is
normal in such a situation, but was reviewed and reversed. Arrangements
to return the claimant to work were made and acted upon. If there had
been a desire to punish, the obvious way to do so was a swift investigation,
a report, a disciplinary hearing and then a penalty of some form, which on
the basis of the Christmas Eve incident had the potential to include
consideration of dismissal. That such a course of events did not take place
does not support the argument of a conspiracy in our view.
1140. The claimant argued that the only explanation for the long delays and
periods of silence was turmoil over how to deal with the allegations and a
stark tension between the need for a credible foundation for the
suspension and the second respondent’s interest in ensuring that the
resus allegation was not the subject of a thorough investigation. We did
not accept that. Ms Glancey gave an explanation for the delays and
periods of silence. It was not objectively a reasonable explanation against
the test of good practice, but it was honest. It took time to arrange HR
involvement, and meetings with staff co-ordinating diaries, amongst other
reasons given.
1141. The claimant also argued that the second respondent was involved in the
conspiracy. In our view the second respondent was not, and the allegation
is unfounded. The second respondent did not seek to prevent the
investigation of the resus incident as was alleged. The second respondent
gave information, and answered the questions about it. As stated
previously it had been raised on 26 December 2023 with the BMA. The
claimant argued that the second respondent had deleted notes on the
mobile phone, but we did not consider that that had happened. We
accepted the evidence of the second respondent on this. There was no
evidence that that had happened in our view.
1142. There was clear prejudgment of the allegations by Drs Searle and Currer,
and other medical staff involved, but they were not those who managed
the investigation or suspension. Nursing staff did so, as would be expected
given the line management structure. Ms Davidson and others did also
engage in what amounted to prejudgment in the commentary, but
ultimately Ms Glancey was the investigator, and we did not consider that
she had prejudged matters.
1143. So far as the investigation is concerned our conclusion is that the first
respondent has not proved that its unreasonable length was because of
the impermissible manifestation, and we find that they have not met the
measure or balance tests. Instructing someone other than Ms Davidson
initially was clearly required as she had a conflict of interest having spoken
to the claimant and intimated a response to her informal complaint, which
would have saved about eight weeks of the delay, and concluding the

4104864/2024 Page 272
investigation in no more than six months was we consider the extent of
delay that can be explained by the respondent. That takes account of
delay at the claimant’s request for the date of the investigation meeting
with her to be changed. The period up to the production of the
Investigation Report was materially longer than that. In our view it was
unreasonable to that extent, and as the first respondent has not
discharged the onus on it. On this matter we find for the claimant.
k) Prohibiting her from discussing her legal claims/issues of
concern in the workplace.
1144. We considered that the issues raised were, as with most investigations
conducted under disciplinary or grievance procedures, ones generally to
be treated in confidence. Employers frequently seek to require those who
are suspended not to speak with other employees for example, save
perhaps with prior permission. The standard letter sent to employees
about an investigation refers to the confidential nature of it.
1145. In practice employees in some situations do speak about such matters,
both within and outwith work. In this case however matters were different
to the norm, not least as the Claim Form had been presented by this point.
Ms Harris acted on instruction from Ms Malone. She used the words from
a standard letter in an investigation which referred to “the case”. But the
difficulty is that that context of investigation was not the only context in
which that discussion took place. There had been various press reports
about the suspension of the claimant [although not produced before us
individually] which had been raised with the first respondent and discussed
internally. The claimant may have been suspected as the source of those
reports but that is not necessarily the case. They could have arisen from
the claim made. A Claim Form is a public document (unless an order for
privacy is made, which was not the case here).
1146. When the claimant was told not to discuss the case with colleagues that
“case” could have been the investigation or the Claim. That ambiguity
means in our view that the first respondent has not discharged the onus
on it. In our view the fault for that is not Ms Harris, who was one of those
asked to pass the message on, but those who framed that message. We
consider that care was required given the circumstances of the Claim
being commenced.
1147. The claimant told Ms Harris that she had been seeking to find support for
her case when she involved the media. She is entitled to do so, although
we noted that that did not bear fruit in the form of any witness who was
called before us.
1148. There was not so much a “prohibition” as an instruction, but we have
concluded that the first respondent has not discharged the onus on it and
it was not the least intrusive measure for the period from 3 July to 22 July

4104864/2024 Page 273
2024. We consider that that does amount to a detriment. The claimant’s
solicitor had raised the issue, and on the latter date the first respondent’s
solicitor confirmed that it related solely to the investigation. At that point
the ambiguity ceased, and from then onwards both the measure and
balance tests were met. For that initial period accordingly we found in
favour of the claimant.
(vi) If the answer to any of the questions at the subparagraphs of 5
above is yes, did that conduct have the purpose or effect of violating
the claimant’s dignity or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading,
humiliating, or offensive environment for her pursuant to section
26(1) EqA having regard to the matters set out in section 26(4)?
1149. In respect of the length of time for the disciplinary investigation we did
consider that the conduct had the effect required by the Act, in particular
it created an hostile environment, and her perception of that is in our view
reasonable in all the circumstances for the period given above. The
reference to patient care did also cause an hostile environment and the
claimant’s perception of that was reasonable. An allegation as to patient
care has the possibility of a reference to the NMC, and an impact on future
career. Finally the message conveyed by Ms Harris did create an hostile
environment for a relatively brief period, as the claimant perceived it as an
attempt to prevent her from discussing the claim with potential witnesses,
who might share her beliefs, which was reasonable. These aspects we
have concluded are all instances of harassment related to belief contrary
to section 26 in light of these findings.
1150. In conclusion we have set out at paragraph 1 of the judgment our findings
that the claimant was harassed by the first respondent in four particular
respects, and that claim succeeds to that extent. For the matters that were
alleged beyond those four aspects the claim does not succeed and is
dismissed.
Direct sex discrimination (section 13 of the EqA)
(vii) In permitting R2 to use the female changing room, did R1 treat the
claimant less favourably than it did treat or would have treated a
male user of that room?
1151. Before addressing this issue as framed we noted that the claimant had
pled direct discrimination also on the protected characteristic of belief.
That did not feature in the List of Issues the parties had prepared, and nor
did it feature in the written or oral submissions made on behalf of the
claimant. We have concluded that the claimant has not pursued the claim
in the basis of that protected characteristic, and it is therefore dismissed.
1152. We turn to the claim of direct discrimination on the protected characteristic
of sex. Section 13 requires that the employer A “treats” B, the claimant,

4104864/2024 Page 274
less favourably than it treats or would treat others in order to be engaged.
By giving the second respondent permission to use the changing room the
first respondent did not treat the claimant in any such manner. In our view
there was no evidence of treatment of the claimant as that term is to be
understood in section 13. The claimant had not been required to use the
changing room, or not to do so, for example. So far as there was treatment,
it was of the second respondent when permission was given. That there
was an impact on the claimant, as she claims, is in our view insufficient –
that is a potential matter of indirect discrimination. Direct and indirect
discrimination are mutually exclusive concepts.
1153. The facts of this care are materially different to the position in cases
founded on by the claimant. In the first, Smith v Safeway (cited above),
the respondent had introduced a policy on appearance, which was applied
to the male claimant. There were parts of the policy applicable only to
males, and other parts applicable only to females. That was a difference
in treatment, with the treatment of the male claimant being application of
that policy to him. His claim was refused on the ground that the policy was
to be examined as a whole, and some differences of detail between men
and women did not make it discriminatory. The following was said by the
Court of Appeal:
“There is an important distinction between discrimination between
the sexes and discrimination against one or other of the sexes. It is
the latter that is forbidden by the Sex Discrimination Act 1975.
Discrimination is defined as being treated less favourably. In my
judgment, this is plainly the meaning of discrimination in Directive
76/207, and the 1975 Act fully reflects that Directive. In many
instances, discrimination between the sexes will result in treating
one more favourably than the other, but this will not necessarily be
the case. If discrimination is to be established, it is necessary to
show not merely that the sexes are treated differently, but that the
treatment accorded to one is less favourable than the treatment
accorded to the other. That is the starting point of the reasoning
adopted in Schmidt [1977] IRLR 360, and in my judgment it is
plainly correct.”
1154. The second is R (Coll) v Secretary of State for Justice 2017 UKSC 40.
That was a case pursued under section 29 of the Equality Act 2010 in
relation to the provision of premises which have been approved by the
Secretary of State under the Offender Management Act 2007. The case
was one of judicial review, where it was argued that there was direct
discrimination as the claimant had been required to live in approved
premises situated far from her home, and that had she been male she
would have been in premises closer to her home as there were far more
of such approved premises for men. The treatment for her was being

4104864/2024 Page 275
required to live in such approved premises at one of only a few locations,
which was to her detriment. Its facts and legal context are entirely different.
1155. The third is Miller (again cited above) where the issue concerned the toilet
facilities provided to a female employee. Whilst there was a female toilet
that was not always free, and in a case of urgency the claimant was
required to use, with the respondent’s permission, the male toilet. The
treatment of the claimant was that provision which on occasion required
use of the male facility, and “if the treatment is assessed as being the
provision of toilet facilities that are appropriate to a person’s requirements
the analysis may differ.” The treatment was inherent in the circumstances.
Where that arises, and the case law in relation to that was referred to by
the EAT in that decision, the mental processes of the respondent are not
relevant. The issue of causation arises from the facts themselves (for
example the lack of provision of a sanitary bin which is a matter only
affecting female bodies not male bodies).
1156. In our view, the facts of that case are to be distinguished from those in this
case. The changing room was not provided in a manner that involved
inherently unfavourable treatment to a woman, as it had been in Miller.
What the claimant complains about is the permission to allow the second
respondent to use it. If that permission had been to a male without the
protected characteristic of gender reassignment that may have been an
argument. But the second respondent does have, and did at the material
time have, that protected characteristic and that was a matter that the first
respondent required to take into account. It required a form of balancing
between two or more protected characteristics as we have addressed. In
the present case we did not conclude that discrimination was inherent from
the circumstances.
1157. Finally the claimant refers to Abbas v ISS Facility Services Employment
Tribunal case number 8000146/2023. That is a decision of another
Employment Tribunal and therefore not binding, but in any event it is
apparent that the claimant there relied on the allegation that she was told
to use the disabled washroom as there was no women’s washroom on
site. That was the treatment of her relevant for that case. It was held to be
less favourable, following Miller. In our view the facts of the present case
are materially different. There was no treatment of the claimant under
section 13. She was not told for example that she had to use the same
changing room as the second respondent, nor was she required to use
any particular facility, on the contrary other places to change were
specifically mentioned to her on more than one occasion.
1158. To equate the permission given to the second respondent with treatment
of the claimant is in our view to elide the separate definitions of direct and
indirect discrimination. If the claimant were right, that distinction would be
irrelevant, and we did not consider that would be consistent with authority.

4104864/2024 Page 276
We did not consider that this aspect of the test had been proved, and in
the absence of such treatment of the claimant the claim under section 13
must be dismissed.
1159. Lest we were wrong about that we then considered the second aspect of
whether the permission granted to the second respondent was because
of the protected characteristic of sex. It was not. The sole reason for it was
the second respondent’s protected characteristic of gender reassignment.
That is a different protected characteristic to that of sex, as the Supreme
Court confirmed. On that basis alone we consider that the claimant’s
argument is to be rejected.
1160. We considered separately, again lest we were wrong, who was the correct
comparator. What the detail of the relevant circumstances are is itself in
dispute. The comparator could either be (i) a man in the female changing
room as the claimant argued or (ii) a trans man in a male changing room,
the trans man being a person who was biologically female, assigned that
at birth, who had changed non-physiological attributes of sex to male to
the same extent as had the second respondent to female, as the
respondents argued.
1161. The comparator is under section 23 a real or hypothetical person who did
not share the protected characteristic relied on whose circumstances are
not materially different. The Supreme Court confirmed that in its decision
in FWS at paragraph 134:
“Where sex is the protected characteristic, a woman relying on
section 13(1) must compare her treatment with the treatment that
was or would have been afforded to a man whose circumstances
are not materially different to hers; in other words a similarly
situated man.”
1162. The characteristic the claimant relies on is sex. The claimant is female. It
appears to us to follow that the comparator is a person who does not share
that protected characteristic, being a male, in essentially the same
circumstances as the claimant was, which for a male was being in the
changing room that was marked male staff only.
1163. To determine that further we considered what the relevant circumstances
are. It appears to us that in this case they are centred around where there
is a person with the protected characteristic of gender reassignment, the
second respondent, who was permitted by the employer the first
respondent to be present in the changing room of the sex or gender that
the second respondent identified as having. That is the essence of the
dispute in this case, and to ignore the protected characteristic which was
why the second respondent was present in the changing room is to omit a
material element. Were it not for the fact of gender reassignment the
second respondent would not have been permitted to use the female

4104864/2024 Page 277
changing room by the first respondent. The permission was given solely
from the first respondent’s belief that the second respondent had the right
to do so from having that protected characteristic.
1164. In such a situation it appears to us clear from the evidence that the first
respondent would have treated the hypothetical comparator in the same
way that it treated the claimant by granting the trans man permission to
use the male changing room. We did not find evidence of less favourable
treatment because of the protected characteristic of sex for that reason. It
was because of the belief of the first respondent that a person undergoing
transition can use the changing room that aligns with their identity.
1165. The identity of the correct comparator point was addressed in the
claimant’s submission by reference to R (Green) v Secretary of State for
Justice [2013] EWHC 3491 (Admin) in which the High Court held, in a
judicial review case which involved a trans woman in prison, that the only
possible comparator was to a male prisoner who was not undergoing
gender reassignment, as the claimant in the case was male, and the
protected characteristic relied on was gender reassignment. A similar
conclusion was reached in the County Court case of Haynes v Thomson
and others, Claim no. K01CT207 1 August 2025.
1166. Neither case relied on the protected characteristic of sex, and each is
distinguished on that basis. Separately neither is binding on a Tribunal in
Scotland in any event. The circumstances and context of those two cases
are we consider entirely different to those before us. We did not consider
those cases of assistance to us in our assessment of the issues we faced.
1167. In evidence and submission the claimant spent much time raising the
circumstances of a fictitious person given the name “Pete”, discussed
above. In very brief summary, Pete had all the appearance of a male,
described as a manly man, who entered the female changing room and
refused to leave. It was suggested that such a person would rightly be told
to leave by a female member of staff there, and the person’s presence
objected to.
1168. We did not consider that such a hypothetical person was a comparator for
the purposes of the Act. If that person was a man by sex at birth, and had
no genuine intention of undergoing gender reassignment but
disingenuously said that he was as a ruse to enter the space for sexual or
other gratification, that person is not within the definition in section 7 for
reasons addressed above. That is a material distinction to the
circumstances of the present case.
1169. It is possible that the hypothetical person was a trans man, having been
assigned female and birth and then undergone gender reassignment
treatment and surgery. Such a person is, under the Supreme Court
decision in FWS, a female by sex, and on the claimant’s argument entitled

4104864/2024 Page 278
to use the female changing room unless exclusion was objectively
justified. If such a person did use the changing room the sharing of the
same sex as the claimant means that the person is not a valid comparator
for that claim. A comparator must not share the protected characteristic
relied on.
1170. The claimant also put forward another comparator “Simon” who was a
man who also had been using the female changing room. But the basis
that person did so was not clear, and that clarity is important. If that
hypothetical person had the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment the analysis is the same as above. If the person did not
there would have been no proper reason to use the changing room unless
for an entirely different reasons such as to effect a repair, and if it was for
improper purposes such as being a voyeur permission to do so would not
have been granted by the first respondent. These are again material
distinctions with the circumstance of the second respondent. We did not
consider such a person to be a comparator under the Act.
1171. We did not consider from the facts found that there had been unconscious
bias. It was not addressed in submission.
1172. For these reasons the claim of direct discrimination on the protected
characteristic of sex fails and is dismissed.
(viii) If yes, was that less favourable treatment to C’s detriment?
1173. This issue does not now arise. Had less favourable treatment been found
it would have been held to be to the claimant’s detriment. Her evidence
that she found the presence of a person she considered male, as the
second respondent was by sex under section 11, caused her to feel
intimidated and embarrassed as addressed above, which we consider
would fall within the definition of detriment set out above.
The onus of proof
1174. The list of issues did not directly address the onus of proof under section
136, nor was the list required to do so, but we address it for completeness.
In any claim of direct discrimination the initial onus of establishing primary
facts from which direct discrimination could be inferred falls on the
claimant. In this regard we did not consider that the claimant had proved
sufficient primary facts to do so.
Indirect discrimination on the grounds of sex (Section 19 of the EqA)
PCP 1 (permitting R2 to use the female changing room in R1’s A&E
Department).
(ix) R1 accepts that PCP1 is capable of being a PCP and that it adopted
PCP1.

4104864/2024 Page 279
(x) Does PCP1 put women at a particular disadvantage compared to
men in that they are deprived of a single-sex room in which to
change?
1175. The Tribunal considered that issue (x) as framed is not correctly stated.
For the purposes of the 2010 Act the second respondent has the sex of
male, and was permitted to use the female changing room when not
having the sex of female because of the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment. The pool that is relevant for that matter we consider to be
those female employees of the department who used the female changing
room, not all women or all female staff of the first respondent.
1176. There was no specific evidence on the numbers doing so. Not all members
of staff who might have, did – the evidence was that some nurses and all
bar one of the consultants changed elsewhere. The position of Healthcare
Workers and other support staff such as receptionists was not addressed
in evidence. The position was therefore not clear from the evidence, and
not fully addressed before us. The issue of how the female staff who use
the changing room consider the permission given to the second
respondent by the first respondent is not one where we consider that a
view can be taken from judicial knowledge or similar. It is not a matter like
childrearing responsibilities. Opinions differ, and the point is contested.
That was clear from the evidence we heard, including that other staff did
not make any form of complaint, and that other nurses did not share the
claimant’s belief as referred to above.
1177. We did not find that there was sufficient evidence of what is normally
referred to as group disadvantage. The evidence that there was on that
came from the claimant, who gave us a number of names of those she
said had a similar view, but as addressed above none of whom gave
evidence before us, and the numbers changed materially from initial
evidence to her evidence on recall. There was very little direct
documentary support from the social media group or other similar sources
presented as noted above. The other evidence put forward for the claimant
was Ms Forstater, but for reasons given above that is we consider not
reliable.
1178. It was put to some of the first respondent’s witnesses that the treatment of
the claimant explained the lack of support. We did not consider that that
was the position. Firstly the claimant named a relatively small number of
staff. Secondly the documents produced to use that might support the
claimant’s views were very limited indeed. There were only a small
number of social media or similar messages before us with any form of
indication of support, and each was somewhat limited in what was stated.
We consider that if the claimant had the level of support she claimed
substantially more documentary evidence from social media groups or

4104864/2024 Page 280
otherwise would most likely have been capable of being produced, quite
apart from a witness to speak to them.
1179. We considered the comments of Lady Hale in Essop, which do not directly
address the issue before us but which we consider assist in making clear
that the group disadvantage requires that many within the pool have the
potential to be disadvantage. How many is sufficient is not made explicit.
The Code clarifies that it does not require to be a majority. The onus of
proof falls on the claimant.
1180. It was not clear how many female staff used the changing room, as some
did not, but inferring from the evidence we heard that the large majority
did, that means that somewhere around 150 people did so from time to
time. At best for the claimant, if her evidence is fully accepted, she proved
that up to nine of those who might have used the said changing room
supported her views to some extent. We did not consider that the evidence
of something of the order of 6% of the pool would meet the requirement of
there being “many” of the group.
1181. Even if it did, what is required is proof of disadvantage. Supporting the
views of the claimant is not the same as suffering disadvantage. It might
do, but equally it might be supporting her right to hold the belief that she
does and to challenge the decision. What each person thought by way of
personal disadvantage was in our view simply not given in the evidence
from the claimant and as none were called what they thought and why
could not be raised with them.
1182. We also took into account that there was no evidence of any complaint or
issue experienced by any other female member of staff not only prior to
the Christmas 2023 incident but also after the claimant returned to work.
1183. We further took into account the terms of FWS which to some extent
support the proposition that women may be disadvantaged by an adult
man being in the changing room. What was not clear however is the extent
of disadvantage when the person in the room is a trans woman. There
was no evidence we regarded as reliable on that aspect.
1184. Ms Bumba was asked about some of the issues relevant to group
disadvantage. Her answers did not fully dispute them, but did not wholly
concede them. They were that (i) men are on average bigger and stronger
than women (ii) men are on average significantly more given to violence
than women (iii) men are in particular much more given to sexual crime
than women and (iv) men are in general a greater threat physically to
women than women are to men.
1185. These propositions however fail to address the issue in this case which is
that the second respondent has the protected characteristic of gender
reassignment, is living in the female gender as has been described, and

4104864/2024 Page 281
doing so is a part of Article 8 rights, and rights under the ETD. Those
factors are behind the first respondent giving permission to the second
respondent to use the changing room. In our view it is not sufficient that
the second respondent has the sex of a man for section 11 to constitute
group disadvantage for the purposes of section 19. It is a matter that
requires sufficient evidence, which in our view the claimant has not led.
1186. The claimant argued that disadvantage to women (which we take to mean
female users of the changing room as discussed above) was clear “as a
matter of inexorable logic”. We do not accept that. It is a question of fact
and degree, and as explained above the evidence we heard contradicted
the claimant’s argument with evidence of female members of staff not
considering that there was a disadvantage.
1187. The claimant also argued that even if a single sex changing room was not
required by law, the first respondent had chosen to confer that on its
female staff and by allowing the second respondent to use it the effect was
to withdraw that benefit from all the female staff who used the changing
room. In our view there is a flaw in that argument. Not all female staff did
consider it that way, as only the claimant complained, as we have
described. The only evidence we heard from a witness on this directly was
the claimant herself, and others who gave evidence contradicted her. In
this regard the claimant is in our view seeking to speak for all female staff,
but there is no evidence we regard as reliable entitling her to do so.
1188. As the detail of the claimant’s evidence was hearsay when other witnesses
might have been called, was so limited in extent and contradicted by other
evidence, together with the findings as to credibility and reliability more
generally made above, we did not find that the claimant had proved how
many staff did share a disadvantage and on that basis dismissed the claim
under section 19.
(xi) Did PCP1 put the claimant at that disadvantage?
1189. We considered this lest we are wrong on the former issue. It is clear that
the claimant was disadvantaged by PCP1. She felt the upset and anxiety
that we have addressed above. It was genuine as we have addressed
above.
(xii) R1 relies on the aims of
(a) Protecting and upholding the rights of R2 under the HRA and
the EqA,
(b) Promoting and upholding Diversity and Inclusion in the
workplace; and

4104864/2024 Page 282
(c) Appropriate use and provision of available facilities in the
workplace which the claimant admits are legitimate aims: is PCP1
directed to that aim?
(xiii) The claimant admits that this aim is legitimate
(xiv) Is PCP1 directed to that aim?
1190. In our view it is. That derives from Ms Bumba’s evidence, supported by
that of Dr Searle who did her own researches, and of Ms Davidson who
again conducted some research of her own. It generally accords with the
terms of the EDHR policy.
(xv) Is PCP1 a proportionate means of achieving that aim?
1191. For essentially the reasons addressed above when applying the Bank
Mellat test we concluded that the first respondent has not discharged the
onus of proof on it and therefore it was not proportionate for the period
between 16 September 2023 and 13 April 2024. The test for section
19(2)(d) is not precisely the same as that in Bank Mellat, as the former
includes the concept of reasonable necessity as explained in authority, but
in our view the two tests are very similar in impact, and the same outcome
arises for this issue as for the analysis of the balance test, and for
essentially the same reasons.
1192. The respondents asserted that blanket exclusionary policies (that a trans
person must use the toilet [and changing room] of their biological sex
regardless of the protected characteristic of gender reassignment) are
likely to breach Article 8. But whether or not there is a breach of Article 8
depends on the facts and circumstances which include the rights of others.
Each of the claimant and second respondent has a right to privacy and
dignity under Article 8. The resolution of the conflict between those rights
we addressed above.
1193. As the European Court of Human Rights put it in Goodwin
“society may reasonably be expected to tolerate a certain
inconvenience to enable individuals to live in dignity and worth in
accordance with the sexual identity chosen by them at great
personal cost.'
1194. In this case, society includes the claimant and second respondent. It is
appreciated that any decision means tolerating inconvenience, but that for
the second respondent from our conclusion is in our view limited, the
matter had latterly been resolved by changing rotas from the evidence
before us, and in all the circumstances of this case we have concluded
that the inconvenience was greater for the claimant than that which would

4104864/2024 Page 283
be required of the second respondent if permission was, or had been,
revoked on an interim basis until rotas were rearranged.
1195. The Tribunal also considered the claimant’s supplementary submissions
of 13 and 16 October 2025. It sought to introduce evidence, albeit not
evidence that she could have provided during the Final Hearing itself. The
impact assessment is said by the claimant to be one in relation to the
public sector equality duty, which is not directly raised as a claim by the
claimant. As it was not within the evidence before us, we consider it not
appropriate to consider the document. To do so would in our view require
additional evidence to be led, that would involve further time and expense,
and even if one of the parties sought that (which none has) that application
we consider would not be within the overriding objective to grant. The lack
of an impact assessment at the material time is a matter that the Tribunal
can and has considered, and the supplementary submission does not in
our view add to that. Even if one assumes that the assessment does state
as the claimant suggests in her supplementary submission, in our view
that does not decide the issue of proportionality as she claims. We did not
therefore accept the supplementary submission.
1196. In all the circumstances we have concluded from the evidence before us
that the first respondent discharged the onus of proof on it that the grant
of permission was proportionate in the period of 2 August 2023 to 15
September 2023 and from and after 14 April 2024, in respect of which we
answer the question in the affirmative, but not for the period 16 September
2023 to 13 April 2024. To that extent we answer the question in the
negative.
PCP2 (permitting staff to use the changing room that aligns with their
gender identity)
(xvi) R1 accepts that PCP2 is capable of being a PCP
(xvii) Did R1 operate PCP2?
1197. The first respondent pled that the issue was addressed on a case by case
basis, and Ms Bumba and Dr Currer gave general evidence on that. There
was however no evidence from the first respondent of what the other
cases of trans staff were or how they had been dealt with. The evidence
was therefore extremely thin in this regard. Ms Bumba’s evidence was that
a trans person of either gender had the right to use the changing room of
the gender they identify with, provided that they had taken some steps
towards their new gender, to paraphrase. Dr Currer said that there would
be an assessment on the basis of balance of risk, any concerns by others,
and where the person undergoing transition was on that process.
1198. It seemed to us that although there was not a written policy what PCP2
states was in effect what was done. It is what would have been the advice

4104864/2024 Page 284
and action had another case arisen, provided that the person in question
has the protected characteristic of gender reassignment, such that that
person is either a trans woman or trans man. It appeared to us to meet the
definition of a PCP in such circumstances, as long as the person did have
the protected characteristic of gender reassignment, such that having that
protected characteristic is to be taken as the meaning of their “gender
identity”. On that amended basis the issue is answered in the affirmative.
(xviii) If the answer to question 15 is yes, did PCP2 put women at a
particular disadvantage compared to men? Specifically:
(a) Are women in general more fearful of men than men are of
women?
(b) Are women in general at greater risk of violence at the hands of
men than men are of violence at the hands of women?
(c) Are men statistically substantially more likely to be guilty of
crimes of violence, sexual assault, indecent exposure and
voyeurism than women?
(d) Do women generally feel taboos about physical modesty more
powerfully than men?
1199. It appeared to us that the reference to question 15 (xv) is a typographical
error and should be to issue 17 (xvii). This issue requires to be considered
with a different pool to that in PCP1. The pool for PCP2 we considered
must be all staff of the first respondent, of both sexes, excluding those who
have the protected characteristic of gender reassignment. The pool was
therefore all staff of the first respondent who were not either trans women
or trans men. There was no evidence led on the details of that pool.
1200. We considered it helpful to follow the structure of the section. The first
question is: did the first respondent apply the PCP to those within the pool
with whom the claimant does not share the protected characteristic, and
we considered that they did. It was a policy applied to all women and men.
1201. The second question is: did or would that PCP create a particular
disadvantage for women within that pool in comparison to men? In this
regard we considered it important that PCP2 did not simply allow all men
to use the female facility, and all women to use the male facility. In each
case the permission was only to be granted if they were trans women or
trans men respectively. It appeared to us that given the terms of that PCP
it is not only their biological sex that must be considered, but also the
protected characteristic of gender reassignment, and it is the combination
of those two elements that must be what puts or would put female staff of
the first respondent at a particular disadvantage when compared to male
staff (where those female and male staff do not have the protected
characteristic of gender reassignment).

4104864/2024 Page 285
1202. The four sub-issues are not directed to that essential component of PCP2
that the permission is given to a trans woman or trans man. They are solely
directed to the issue of sex, and the binary of male and female. We did not
consider that the sub-issues were relevantly framed for PCP2 in light of
that.
1203. Those sub-issues are however specifics of the more general question of
disadvantage set out in the question posed above. We considered
whether that should be answered in the affirmative or negative, and for
that considered what evidence the claimant led. We have commented
above that the evidence of Ms Forstater which was not accepted save as
to government statistics or similar. Ms Forstater’s evidence did not in our
view establish the disadvantage.
1204. The only other evidence about group disadvantage to support the position
of the claimant came from the claimant herself. She of course had her
views as to what the disadvantage was for her, but we did not consider
that we should infer from that that there was a particular disadvantage to
other female staff of the first respondent. That is partly because of the
concerns over the reliability of the claimant’s evidence, partly because of
the absence of evidence that we consider could have been led by the
claimant and was not, being any one or more of those of her colleagues
she spoke about, and partly because there was contradictory evidence
from the first respondent which we accepted.
1205. That contradictory evidence came from several of the first respondents’
witnesses who stated that there had been no other concerns raised, or
which they were aware of more informally, and whose evidence was to the
effect that the staff had accepted the second respondent’s identity and use
of the changing room, in particular from Ms Davidson and Ms Curran, both
of whose evidence the Tribunal accepted. Ms Davidson said that the use
of the changing room by the second respondent did not seem to have
bothered other nurses. The female staff of the first respondent who gave
evidence to us did not suggest that the presence of the second respondent
in the changing room caused them any disadvantage, and on the contrary
several of them supported the second respondent doing so.
1206. Dobson gave guidance on how group disadvantage may be proved. It set
out four possibilities, not on an exclusive basis. The first was statistical or
other tangible evidence of disadvantage. We did not have any directed to
the position of trans women or trans men for the purposes of PCP2. That
does not mean that the claim fails, and we can consider the evidence on
which we made a finding in fact of the higher percentage of conviction
rates for males over females, although the figures in relation to those who
were trans were not provided at least in a manner we regarded as
intelligible and reliable.

4104864/2024 Page 286
1207. The second is where it can be inferred from the fact that there is a
particular disadvantage in the individual case, but as addressed above we
did not consider that that was appropriate in this case. The third is that the
disadvantage may be inherent in the PCP in question, and the claimant
argued that it was self-evidently so. But in our view as the evidence in the
case contradicted that proposition, it was not. The fourth is where the
disadvantage may be established having regard to matters, such as the
childcare disparity, of which judicial knowledge should be taken. That
depends on the nature of the PCP and how it relates to the matters on
which judicial knowledge is applicable. We consider that judicial
knowledge does not extend to disadvantage caused by PCP2, and it is a
matter that is materially different from those such as childcare disparity.
1208. Had the claimant led evidence from others within the pool on this issue, or
skilled evidence question we posed above, matters may have been
different. As it was not however, we concluded that the claimant had not
established group disadvantage. Arguments of staff being fearful as an
explanation for the lack of supporting witnesses made by the claimant’s
counsel we rejected as there was an absence of any evidence we
accepted about that. It was a point raised in submission without evidential
foundation in our view.
1209. Even on such an argument, which was based on how the first respondent
treated the claimant and which was characterised as retribution which in
turn had caused others not to come forward, that can only have been from
the time of the special leave, and then shortly afterwards with the
suspension of the claimant. There was a period of about five months prior
to that when the second respondent used the changing room. That in our
view there was no complaint at all in that period save from the claimant is
contrary to the argument made of fear of retribution being why no other
member of staff complained. Until very early in 2024 there could be no
argument of retribution. In so far as there could be thereafter, for the
reasons given we did not accept that there had been.
1210. We then considered the sub-issues. In our view each of (a), (b) and (d) is
framed in a manner in which the meaning is unduly ambiguous. What is
meant by the words “generally” or “in general” we consider to be unclear,
whether that is by majority of the group, or for most of the time for all of
the group, or on many occasions for most of the group for example. What
is meant by taboos about physical modesty we did not consider clear.
1211. In relation to each of those sub-issues there is we consider in addition a
measure of dispute over them, and the test for accepting them as being
within judicial knowledge was not met. We have not therefore made
findings as to sub-issues (a), (b) or (d) on the basis proposed by the
claimant as they were not proved, and are not within judicial knowledge.

4104864/2024 Page 287
1212. On (c) there was as noted above some material from governmental
agencies supporting the proposition to an extent, and a finding in fact is
made on the basis of that but subject to the qualification that there was not
sufficient evidence to make a finding in relation to those with the protected
characteristic of gender reassignment.
1213. We considered that there is not a sufficient evidential basis on which to
make any finding that those in the position of the second respondent, with
the sex of male under section 11 and with the protected characteristic of
gender reassignment under section 7, are statistically or otherwise more
likely to be guilty of the crimes specified than biological women, or a risk
to biological women greater than those who are biological women. It is in
our view not a matter within judicial knowledge.
1214. In regard to what had been proved we also took into account our
assessment of the second respondent from the manner of giving evidence
before us, and the facts overall. We did not consider that there was any
risk to the safety of the claimant from the presence of the second
respondent in the changing room, and that that was a contra indicator to
using the evidence of the claimant as a basis to conclude that group
disadvantage could be inferred.
1215. Even if we had accepted as facts the propositions in the sub-issues they
did not in our view address an essential aspect of the disadvantage from
the PCP, that permission was given to those who had the protected
characteristic of gender reassignment, for the reasons given above, and
because of that would not have been sufficient to establish group
disadvantage.
1216. Having made the findings in fact that we have, including those on the basis
of judicial knowledge to the limited extent that we have, we concluded that
the claimant had not established group disadvantage arising from PCP2.
The issue is answered in the negative accordingly.
(xix) Did PCP2 put the claimant to that disadvantage?
1217. Again we address this issue lest we are wrong on the foregoing issue, and
we answer it in the affirmative. The claimant was disadvantaged by the
permission granted to a biological male because of her perception that it
was intimidating and embarrassing for her as explained above.
(xx) The aim relied on by R1 is the same as for PCP 1 but pertaining to
the rights of trans staff generally rather than only specifically R2.
Without admission as to what constitutes an inclusive and safe
working environment for all staff or the content of the rights of trans
staff under that legislation, the claimant admits that this is a
legitimate aim.

4104864/2024 Page 288
(xxi) Is PCP2 directed to that aim?
1218. We considered that it was, largely for the same reasons as PCP1 but in
the context of a wider group than the second respondent as an individual
as we explain above.
(xxii) Was PCP2 a proportionate means of achieving that aim?
1219. For essentially the same reasons as for PCP1 we answered this in the
negative for the period between 16 September 2023 and 13 April 2024
and otherwise in the affirmative. In our view the extent of complaints, or
their absence, is a material factor in the proportionality test, and as the
claimant has been the only member of staff raising any complaint to the
first respondent we concluded that the defence under section 19(2)(d) had
been established.
1220. In light of the foregoing findings the claim under section 19 is dismissed.
Victimisation (Section 27 of the EqA)
(xxiii) Did the claimant’s conversation with R2 referred to at paragraphs
13 to 15 of the Form ET1 Paper Apart constitute a protected act
within the meaning of Section 27(2)(d) of the EqA?
1221. We considered that the claimant had not proved that a protected act had
taken place. In our view the circumstances are to be taken into account as
explained in Kokomane, although that was in a different context. The
circumstances relevant to the present case in our view included that the
claimant and second respondent were in the female changing room at the
material time because of the permission given to the second respondent
of which the claimant was aware. What the claimant said was a form of
protest that the second respondent was present in it, that the second
respondent was in the claimant’s view not a woman, that to be present in
that room was unacceptable, and doing so made her feel intimidated and
embarrassed. She set out her views on the position as explained above.
1222. In our view that is not sufficient to amount to a protected act as the
claimant did not complain to the first respondent. What the claimant did
was to argue with the second respondent that the second respondent
could not and should not be in the changing room. The second respondent
was not the person who decided the issue of permission, but acted on the
permission. The claimant in our view made personal comments to the
second respondent as an individual, and doing so was not a complaint to
the first respondent. In our view it is not enough that the second
respondent is an employee of the same employer. The second respondent
was not in any line management role for the claimant, nor in a role for
which handling complaints was a part of the duty, such as someone on
HR, from which it could be inferred that the complaint was made to the
first respondent.

4104864/2024 Page 289
1223. In this regard we took account of the fact that the second respondent did
not keep the matter as private, but quickly involved a consultant, and
raised matters by way of complaint against the claimant. That then
engaged higher levels of management, and those in human resources.
But that was not in the nature of conveying a complaint by the claimant, it
was solely as a complaint of harassment against her. That is the context
in which matters were raised by the second respondent. In our view it is
not consistent with the purpose of the Act and authority set out above to
construe a complaint that the claimant had harassed the second
respondent made to the first respondent as if a complaint by the claimant
of a breach of the Act by the first respondent, or by the second respondent
for which the first respondent is vicariously liable.
1224. There is no authority we have found, or to which we were referred,
addressing specifically the question of to whom a complaint is to be made.
It is from the cases we have referred to above normally obviously made to
the employer. Here however we have concluded that it was not, and as
the onus of proving that there was a protected act falls on the claimant the
claimant has not proved that there was a protected act. We therefore
dismissed the claim under section 27.
1225. We then addressed matters on the basis that we were wrong and that the
discussion on Christmas Eve was a protected act.
(xxiv) If yes, are the following detriments made out by the
evidence, and, if so, did R1 victimise the claimant by subjecting her
to these detriments? -
a) Placing her on special leave on 30 December 2023;
aa. She was the subject of the emails referred to at 15A and 17A
of the ET1
b) Ms Curran informing her that there had been a serious complaint
that she had bullied a colleague;
c) Suspending her on 4 January 2024;
cc. She was referred to the NMC on or around 5 January 2024, and
her colleagues were told that she had been referred to the NMC as
described at 17A of the ET1.
d) Advising her of an investigation into her “alleged unwanted
behaviours” towards another member of NHS Fife staff;
e) Reviewing and continuing her suspension on 2 February 2024;
f) Ms Davidson and Ms Myles seeking to persuade her to return to
work after her suspension at a different workplace;

4104864/2024 Page 290
g) Informing her that because she was unable to work day shifts in
place of her usual night shifts, her suspension would be reinstated;
h) Pressurising her into returning to work during April 2024 on
weekend day shifts;
i) Ms Myles’ letter of 28 March 2024 referring to a need for “proper
oversight” of her return to work, including oversight of her
interactions with staff and patients;
j) Ms Myles’ statement that part of the investigation related to the
care of patients; and
k) The prohibition on discussing her legal claim/issues of concern
in the workplace?
1226. Again in our view this issue does not accurately set out the test to be
applied. The question is whether a detriment was suffered because the
claimant had done a protected act. It is a question of causation. We
considered whether primary facts had been established from which we
could conclude that such an act was the cause of the alleged detriments
such as the shift the onus to the first respondent. The facts that we
considered in this respect are the same as taken into account in relation
to belief or impermissible manifestation. They are naturally in a context
that is different to that of the distinction between belief and manifestation
of belief impermissibly, but the evidence is we consider sufficiently
material and similar for the same conclusion to be reached.
1227. We therefore found that the onus passed to the first respondent to prove
that, if a protected act had taken place, the reason for each of the
detriments referred to was not the protected act to any significant extent
(or that it had sufficient weight to do so as explained in authority above).
For essentially the same reasons as given above we consider that the first
respondent has not proved that the making of any protected act was not
to any significant extent the reason for matters (i), (j) and (k), and on that
we would have found for the claimant if there was a protected act, but
otherwise the first respondent had discharged the onus on it. The reasons
for the acts are as set out above. Matters (i), (j) and (k) would have fallen
within the definition of detriment in our view if there had been a protected
act on the basis of our findings above.
(xxv) Was the claimant subjected to a detriment by the following acts of
R2 on the ground that the claimant had done a protected act
pursuant to s.27(2) EqA: -
a) By refusing to leave the women’s changing room when
challenged by her on 24/25 December 2023; and

4104864/2024 Page 291
b) By making a complaint of bullying against her, which was false
in the respects referred to at paragraph 19 of the Form ET1 Paper
Apart?
1228. In our view this issue, as framed by the parties, does not properly set out
the test to be applied. The word used in the Act is “because”. That may be
semantics, but in our view it is appropriate to make that correction.
1229. We did not consider that the second respondent did “refuse to leave” the
changing room as this issue proposes. We have accepted the second
respondent’s evidence in relation to the incident. The second respondent
left when the second respondent felt able to, which was when the claimant
had agreed to raise matters by the protocols referred to as referred to
above and had ceased making her arguments to the second respondent.
The reason the second respondent did not leave immediately is that the
claimant continued to make her arguments in the manner we have
described. It was the claimant who prolonged it, rather than the second
respondent. The background is also that the second respondent believed
that the second respondent had a right to be there having been informed
so by the first respondent, and as addressed above that permission was
not inherently unlawful.
1230. The second respondent is not responsible for the permission being in part
contrary to the Act, a matter addressed in more detail below. The second
respondent’s acts were wholly unrelated to the claimant doing any
protected act, in our view. We do not consider that any reasonable
employee would consider what the second respondent did during the
Christmas Eve incident to be a detriment. So far as the detriment is alleged
against the second respondent it is not established on the evidence.
1231. The making of the complaint of (harassment and) bullying was because of
the view the second respondent took of what had occurred at the meeting
between them, which the second respondent genuinely considered to be
bullying by the claimant, and harassment related to gender reassignment
such as to be a hate incident within the first respondent’s policy, and not
to any extent at all on the ground of the making of any protected
disclosure. As we have found above, there was harassment of the second
respondent by the claimant related to gender reassignment to the extent
set out above. The detriment as alleged of a false complaint is not
established on the evidence, and it was not something any reasonable
employee would consider to be a detriment. On this issue we answer the
issue in the negative.
1232. We therefore dismissed the claim under section 27 of the Act.

4104864/2024 Page 292
Harassment within the meaning of s.26(3)
(xxvi) Did the claimant’s conversation with R2 referred to at paragraphs
13 to 15 of the Form ET1 Paper Apart constitute a rejection of R2’s
harassment of her within the meaning of section 26(3) of the EqA?
1233. In our view it did not. The second respondent did not reject the claimant’s
allegation of harassment, but sought to respond to what the claimant was
saying in the manner we have described above, which we consider not
properly objectionable. The response in basic summary was to refer to the
permission given, to state that there were protocols to address her
concerns, and that doing so as she did at that time and place was not
appropriate. The second respondent was sympathetic to what the
claimant said, although the claimant did not appear to accept that at the
time. On the facts we consider that this allegation is not established, we
answer it in the negative and the claim under section 26(3) is dismissed.
(xxvii) Did R1 subject C to the detriments referred to at subparagraphs
(a)-(e) and (g) to (k) of issue 5 above because she had rejected
R2’s harassment of her?
1234. In our view the answer to this question is also in the negative as there was
no harassment of the claimant by the second respondent for the reasons
given above. The claimant did not allege that she had rejected harassment
until that claim was added by amendment, until which time it appears to
us that the first respondent was unaware of that allegation, and there was
no evidence we heard on which it could be said that the first respondent
ought reasonably to have been aware of it. On that basis it appears to us
that rejection of harassment cannot have been any part of the reason for
the acts referred to. In our view the claimant has not proved primary facts
from which the inference can be drawn. This claim is also dismissed
accordingly.
(xxviii) Did R2 subject the claimant to a detriment by the following acts of
R2 because she had rejected R2’s harassment of her?
a) By refusing to leave the women’s changing room when
challenged by her on 24/25 December 2023; and
b) By making an unfounded complaint of bullying against her, which
was false in the respects referred to at paragraph 19 of the Form
ET1 Paper Apart.
1235. For essentially the same reasons as given above we did not consider that
the detriments founded on had been established. The second respondent
did not refuse to leave the changing room when challenged, and the
allegation of bullying that was made by the second respondent was not
unfounded or false. We answer this issue in the negative.

4104864/2024 Page 293
Jurisdiction
(xxix) Is any matter outwith the jurisdiction of the Tribunal?
1236. As addressed above we added this issue which it requires to do where its
own jurisdiction is concerned, although it was not a matter raised in
parties’ submissions. A Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over any issue
that may arise under section 29 of the 2010 Act, or the 1992 Regulations.
The harassment we have found occurred partly within the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction under section 123, but an issue does arise for the incident on
25 October 2023 which was more than three months prior to the
commencement of Early Conciliation.
1237. The Tribunal concluded that there had been conduct extending over a
period as the events followed the grant of permission to the second
respondent which itself continued throughout, but if not that it was just and
equitable to allow the claim to be heard. The respondents did not raise the
issue, or argue that there had been any impairment to a fair trial in the
submission. We concluded that we do have jurisdiction under section 123
for that incident accordingly.
Liability, if any, of second respondent
(xxx) Is the second respondent liable for any of the acts of harassment
found?
1238. There is a further issue we considered we required to address. We noted
during deliberations that the parties’ List of Issues had not engaged with
the provisions under the Act by which the second respondent may or may
not have personal liability in the event of any finding in favour of the
claimant.
1239. The background to our doing so is that neither in the pleadings nor in
submission did the claimant identify the basis for personal liability of the
second respondent. It appeared to be assumed that if the second
respondent had acted as alleged by the claimant personal liability
followed. Had the findings been to that effect that is probably the case,
although a basis in law for the finding would necessarily have been
required, and would in our view have been on the basis of section 110.
But the findings are substantially different, and on the materially more
limited basis that we have identified above.
1240. The background is also that the second respondent has not set out in
pleadings or submission (made of course jointly with the first respondent)
any argument in that regard either. The second respondent has been
included in the Claim made by the claimant from its inception, and this
issue is we considered one we required to address because of that, even
if not addressed by any of the parties. We cannot make a finding against
a party without identifying the basis in law on which that is done.

4104864/2024 Page 294
1241. The claimant has not set out any specific argument before us on which to
make a finding to the effect that there is personal liability of the second
respondent. In Yoosefinejad v East Space Ltd: [2025] EAT 150 the
EAT held that a tribunal had been wrong to make a decision on a claim of
breach of contract on a basis not argued before it, relying on Court of
Appeal authority from a civil cause in so doing, being Phones 4U Ltd (in
administration) v EE Ltd & Others [2025] EWCA Civ 869.
1242. The position in Scottish civil procedure is not precisely the same as set
out in that English civil case, in our view. In Wyman-Gordon Ltd v
Proclad International Ltd 2011 SC 338 the Inner House held as follows,
in a commercial cause in which the Judge had decided a matter not pled,
raised in evidence or addressed in submission:
“As was said by the late Lord Macphail in his work, Sheriff Court
Practice , 3rd Ed. at paragraph 17.28:
“It is generally incorrect to decide any matter raised on
record which the parties have declined to argue. It is
incorrect to decide any matter in dispute on a ground which
has not been explored in evidence or argument.”
In support of that proposition, with which we agree, the case of Kay
v Ayrshire & Arran Health Board is cited. In that connection the
observations of Lord President Emslie at page 153 are apt. There
he said:
“It is one thing for a judge to lend his assistance to a party
litigant to present his case in evidence. That is entirely
proper. It is quite another thing and wholly improper for a
judge to neglect the principle of doing justice between the
parties and of fairness to both parties by going further and
giving a decision in favour of one party upon a ground of his
own devising which has not been the subject of
consideration and exploration at the proof, and of which the
opposing party has had no notice whatever. The result, and
the inevitable result, of what the Lord Ordinary has done in
this case is that the judgment which he has given in the
pursuer's favour is quite indefensible and must be recalled.”
In our view, if, following a legal debate or a proof, some matter,
whether it be an authority not relied upon, or some issue not the
subject of any submissions before him, occurs to a judge to be
material to his decision, the proper course would be, before giving
judgment, to put the case out By Order, explaining to the parties
why he has taken that course and affording to them the opportunity

4104864/2024 Page 295
to make any motion, or present any submission, to him on the topic
in question before he reaches his conclusions and delivers
judgment. That is a course which could and should have been
followed in the present case, if the commercial judge considered
that it was necessary to enter into consideration of the possibility of
the implication of a term in the contract between the parties.”
1243. It appeared to us to follow from that that the position under Scottish civil
practice is that a case can be decided beyond the parties pleadings and
submissions where that is appropriate, although that is rarely the case.
Whilst the Inner House case and authorities cited in it are not directly
binding in this regard, they guide us in what is fair and just under Rule 3.
That is in the context that the rules of pleading in the Employment Tribunal
are entirely unlike those in the civil courts, and there are material
distinctions in the procedural rules for the Employment Tribunal and civil
courts with, for example, no equivalent in the Scottish civil courts to the
terms of Rule 3 or to the process of reconsideration, as we shall come to.
1244. In the claim before us there was a case pursued against the second
respondent as an individual, but the basis in law for that was not
specifically addressed either in the pleadings or in submission. We
considered that pleading and argument on this matter is normally required
from the claimant, and there has been none put before us. No reason for
that has been provided, and this is not one of the obvious cases where
liability can be said not to require explanation. It does, and has not been
given. It appeared to us that in light of that the claim against the second
respondent must fail.
1245. We considered the position lest we were wrong in that conclusion. The
statutory terms are as we note below, the evidence has been heard, and
we considered that it is an issue that we are able to determine. As the
claimant has not specified what the relevant sections of the Act are we
shall address all those we considered could be applicable.
1246. In our view the consideration of this matter starts with section 26 and the
definition of harassment. That does not of itself confer a right of action to
the person harassed against the alleged harasser. A combination of
sections 40, 113 and 120 give the Employment Tribunal jurisdiction to
determine issues of harassment. Section 40 refers only to an employer
not harassing, not to an employee save as the person harassed. Section
40 therefore does not itself give a right of action against an individual
employee for what that person does.
1247. The provisions relevant to the liability of an employee are found in sections
109 – 112. Section 109 in effect confers vicarious liability under the Act on
the employer for acts of the employee in the course of employment unless

4104864/2024 Page 296
the defence in sub-section (4) is established, which is not a defence the
first respondent seeks to rely on in this case. Section 110 confers personal
liability on an employee if their act in the course of employment is treated
as having been done by the employer and amounts to a contravention of
the Act under section 40, such that if vicarious liability applies under
section 109 the employee responsible for that has personal liability.
Section 111 applies where the employee instructs, causes or induces
another person to do something that breaches the Act. It includes indirect
inducement and attempting to instruct, cause or induce the breach.
Section 112 applies where the employee knowingly helps another person
to contravene the Act.
1248. In our view given the facts that we have found the liability of the first
respondent does not arise because of its vicarious liability for the acts of
the second respondent. The reason we have found harassment was the
permission given to the second respondent to use the changing room for
the period set out above as that did not meet the Bank Mellat test. It was
a decision of the first respondent and not the second respondent. Both
incidents on 25 October and Christmas Eve 2023 only took place in light
of the grant of permission to use the female changing room by the first
respondent. The claimant was aware of that permission. That such
permission had been granted was an agreed fact.
1249. Nothing from what the second respondent said or did in either incident in
our view could have been reasonably perceived as harassment by the
second respondent, given that the second respondent was simply acting
on the basis of permission given by the first respondent. We did not
consider that section 110 applied in the facts of this case.
1250. We considered separately whether the defence in section 110(3) applied
in the circumstances in the event that section 110 was engaged, contrary
to our finding. It was not pled by the second respondent but as we are
considering these issues on the basis set out above in respect of the
claimant we considered that it was fair and just to do so from the
perspective of the second respondent similarly.
1251. We found no authority on this provision. The sub-section is mentioned in
Bailey, but only in passing and not discussed in the context of when it
does or does not apply. More widely however the EAT made the following
comment in that case:
““There is a clear statutory intention to outlaw conduct that is
discriminatory on proscribed grounds, whatever the form in which
Parliament has been able to anticipate it occurring. Where there is
any doubt about the meaning of the relevant provisions, they should
therefore be given a construction which recognises the broad scope
which Parliament intended the legislation to have. This has for
many years been recognised in cases involving antidiscrimination

4104864/2024 Page 297
legislation, such as Jones v Tower Boot Co Ltd [1997] ICR 254 CA
(page 262D per Waite LJ).”
1252. It appeared to us that where the permission had been given that it should
be considered of the same effect as a statement that the Act was not being
breached. That is because the second respondent has the protected
characteristic of gender reassignment under the Act, and it was that
protected characteristic that was the reason for the grant of permission.
The grant of permission was consistent with the corporate view of the first
respondent that makes up PCP2. It was initially, and latterly, lawful as we
have addressed above. As the second respondent had that protected
characteristic the protections that could arise from sections 19 or 26, and
possibly others, might have been engaged had permission not been
granted, all again as addressed above.
1253. The protected characteristic itself arose from case law domestic and
European in relation to human rights and the Equal Treatment Directive.
It is perhaps most clearly expressed by reference to the desire to live life
fully in the acquired gender in Work and Pensions, but also in references
to the personal sphere of each individual and the right to establish details
of their identity including personal development and to physical and moral
security in the full sense enjoyed by others in society in Goodwin; a
person’s psychological integrity in Nicot; and to the description of gender
incongruence in TH which included the desire to live and be accepted as
a person of the experienced gender. It appears to us that that is what lay
behind the second respondent’s discussion with Dr Searle on this issue,
and the earlier use by the second respondent of female changing rooms
prior to joining the department but after commencing the process of
gender reassignment.
1254. In light of that context we considered it permissible to read across from the
authorities on what is a protected act under section 27 that specific
reference to the Act or terms such as discrimination or harassment are not
essential to determining the issue under section 110(3). It appeared to us
that it would be construing the Act too narrowly to be workable if the
subsection required the employer to say in terms something very similar
to “your acting on this permission is not a breach of the Equality Act 2010”.
1255. What matters both as to the protected act and for section 110(3) is
substance, not form, in our view. If it is made reasonably clear to the
employee that permission to act is being given, it appears to us that that
is sufficient provided that it was objectively reasonable for the employee
to take what was said as that, and the employee then acts within the scope
of the permission granted. It appears to us that that is in accordance with
a purposive construction of the Act. We considered that it was objectively
reasonable for the second respondent to have understood that permission

4104864/2024 Page 298
was given in terms that inferred that acting on the permission would not
amount to a breach of the 2010 Act.
1256. In our view what the second respondent did on each of the incidents when
the claimant and second respondent were together in the changing room
simply followed the grant of permission to do so. The second respondent
acted within the ambit of the permission granted. We concluded that it
would not be in accordance with the intention of Parliament not to apply
the defence in section 110(3) in these circumstances. Accordingly even if
section 110 is engaged initially, contrary to the conclusion we reached,
we consider that the terms of the sub-section apply and the second
respondent is not liable as an individual under that provision. For that
separate reason section 110 does not confer personal liability on the
second respondent.
1257. We then considered whether section 111 was engaged. In our view it was
not. There is in our view no basis from the evidence to suggest that the
second respondent instructed the grant of permission. In so far as the
second respondent can be said to have made a request of Dr Searle when
they met in mid-August 2023 to use the [female] changing room, or raise
that as something that was desired, that is not sufficient, as the case law
referred to above we consider establishes. The decision was taken, it
appears to us, by Dr Searle, acting on advice and after discussion with
others. The question focusses in our view firstly on whether the second
respondent induced, or attempted to induce, the breach. In Bailey induce
was held to be synonymous with persuade, and its meaning was also
discussed in Akester.
1258. We considered that the second respondent did not induce the first
respondent to grant the permission, or attempt so to do. The decision was
one for the first respondent. The first respondent might have made a
different decision, and we are satisfied that the second respondent would
have complied with that. That was evident from the second respondent’s
position after the Christmas Eve incident that did not seek to insist on using
that room to change.
1259. In Bailey the EAT said the following after discussing the terms of section
111:
“I conclude that Person A must intentionally induce person B to
carry out an act or omission which contains all the elements of the
statutory tort that is a basic contravention, including any mental
element of the basic contravention.”
1260. We considered secondly the issue of causing the contravention. In its
discussion of the interpretation of the word “cause” in the section the EAT
stated

4104864/2024 Page 299
“This is to be done by having regard to the Parliamentary intention
of rooting out and eradicating discrimination on proscribed grounds,
and by applying common sense……. once “but for” causation has
been established, the question is whether, having regard to the
statutory context and to all the facts, it is fair or reasonable or just
to find person A liable for causing person B’s contravention of the
2010 Act. No doubt foreseeability will often be a relevant area of
enquiry, but all will depend on the facts.”
1261. The claimant has not discharged the onus on her of establishing that the
second respondent is liable under this aspect of the section. The second
respondent did not cause or attempt to cause the contravention. All that
the second respondent did was to discuss the issue of which facilities to
use, and then act on receipt of permission. Nothing that the second
respondent said or did, in our view, was a basis on which to make a finding
of harassment under section 26 as either inducing or causing the
harassment, or attempting to do so. In the circumstances of the case it is
not fair, or reasonable, or just, to make any such finding against the
second respondent, applying the wording from Bailey.
1262. Section 112 requires the second respondent to have knowingly helped the
first respondent to commit the harassment we have found. There was in
our view no evidence to that effect. Again the decision in Akester in our
view supports to a small extent the conclusion that section 112 is not
engaged in this case.
1263. In light of all these findings there is no basis under the Act on which
personal liability on the part of the second respondent might be
established and the claim against the second respondent is dismissed.
Interventions
1264. For completeness we make reference to the written submission made to
it by those permitted to do so under Rule 36. That for the first intervener,
For Women Scotland which was to the effect that the Supreme Court
decision in FWS, in which it was the Petitioner, led inevitably to a finding
for the claimant we rejected for the reasons set out above. The submission
by the second intervener, Not for Gays, was not directed specifically to an
issue in the case, and we did not require to address directly given the
manner in which we have assessed the evidence.
1265. The third application under Rule 36 was from TransLucent. In essential
terms it argued that the definition of women in the 1992 Regulations
required a different interpretation to that from by the Supreme Court in
FWS under the 2010 Act, so as to include a trans woman, and argued that
that decision had been wrongly decided, but as we discuss above the
Tribunal cannot competently decide an issue of the interpretation of that
term under those Regulations, and we are bound by the Supreme Court

4104864/2024 Page 300
decision in so far as it decided the issue of the definition of woman for the
purposes of section 11 of the Act such that we did not accept the
submission that FWS had been wrongly decided. Much of the submission
had in any event been addressed in the respondents’ submission.
Although we considered the submission it was not of assistance to us in
determining the issues in this case.
Conclusion
1266. The Tribunal accordingly found in favour of the claimant in relation to the
claim under section 26(1) as against the first respondent to the extent set
out in the Judgment, and otherwise dismissed her claims against both
respondents.
1267. There is a final matter to raise. Some of the references to authority or
specific statutory provisions made above were not addressed directly or
fully by parties in their submissions. Some of the issues have been
reframed to an extent, we have determined separately from parts of the
the submissions how the Act should be construed, and the issue of the
personal liability of the second respondent has been raised and addressed
in the manner we have explained.
1268. We considered whether to raise these matters with the parties prior to
taking a decision, particularly in light of Wyman-Gordon. That would have
involved sending a message to the parties in a rough equivalent to putting
a case out by order/ We concluded that seeking to do so without having
the framework of this Judgment to set them in context would be extremely
difficult if not impossible to do effectively. It would have required an
explanation of those matters that the parties were to be invited to comment
on before any facts had been found. It appeared to us that making a
decision on these facts first is to all intents and purposes essential in order
for parties to be aware of the context for determination of these matter.
1269. Separately even if we had managed to explain matters to parties prior to
finding facts, time for the representatives to take instructions and respond
would be required, and assuming that that then required an oral hearing
time, as would be likely, for the date or dates of the same to be fixed. That
was most likely to lead to a delay of several months whilst the diaries of
counsel and the Tribunal members were co-ordinated, during all of which
time the parties would remain unaware of any outcome of the case where
there has already been a material delay between the February and July
hearing dates.
1270. We also considered sending the parties our judgment in draft form for their
further submission, but there is no Rule permitting that, we are unaware
of any practice as to that having taken place, and we did not consider that
it fell within the Rules to do so.

4104864/2024 Page 301
1271. We concluded that it was in the unusual circumstances of this case in
accordance with the overriding objective to issue this Judgment so that
the matters could be seen in that full context and to avoid delay in a case
which has already had a substantial delay between the start and
conclusion of the Final Hearing. If any party considers that it has been
prejudiced by this, the party can apply for reconsideration of the Judgment
referring to the issue, provision or authority it considers it had not had an
opportunity fully to address and making submissions on the same, which
the Tribunal can then consider under Rules 68 – 71 of the Rules. This
approach was considered in general terms, albeit very different
circumstances, in Tesco Stores Ltd v Element [2025] EAT 112 (a
decision and possibility not commented upon in Yoosefinejad). There is
no equivalent in Scottish civil procedure to reconsideration, which in our
view is a material consideration in deciding how to decide the question of
procedure fairly and justly, and the Tribunal considered that in all the
circumstances proceeding in this manner within the context of this case
was preferable to the alternatives.
Further procedure
1272. The Tribunal will address separately with the parties the arrangements for
holding a Final Hearing on the issue of remedy, and what case
management orders are required for that.
Date sent to parties _________________________
Appendix
1. Sempill-Forbes
The circumstances of the person whose sex was in dispute were described as
those of an hermaphrodite, meaning having sex organs or other sexual
characteristics that are not clearly male or female (which may now be
characterised as a difference of sexual development).
The Outer House said the following:
“According to the evidence in the present case, the main medical
criteria of sex, according to present knowledge, are fourfold,

4104864/2024 Page 302
namely chromosomal sex, gonadal sex, apparent or phenotypical
sex, and psychological sex. The first three of these criteria were
sometimes grouped together in the evidence under the descriptions
“physical sex” or “anatomical sex”…..
[after dealing with evidence as to testicular tissue] Whatever the
true explanation of these matters may be, I am satisfied that, at any
rate in the case of a true hermaphrodite, chromosomal sex is the
least valuable of the available criteria, when the matter under
consideration is not a medical and parental decision as to the social
sex in which an infant should be reared, which decision may
involve, amongst other things, surgical interference with the
genitalia and treatment with hormones, but the legal identification
of sex in an adult……
I now turn to apparent or phenotypical sex. ……The matter must in
the end of the day be one of impression and degree based on the
whole available evidence……
The final criterion which falls to be considered is what is called in
the evidence psychological sex. There was a considerable
argument before me as to whether it could ever be proper to take
this aspect of the matter into account when the question was the
legal identification of sex, as contrasted, for example, with the
making of a decision as to the best medical, surgical or psychiatric
treatment in cases of intersex or trans-sexualism. I am far from
saying, to take an example, that a finding that the psychological sex
of an individual was male would ever justify a conclusion that a
person was legally male although the physical sex of that person
was clearly female, but, in a case where a person can function
sexually as a male to the extent which the Second Petitioner is able
to do, and where there can be found in that person’s body male
gonadal tissue from which masculine attributes, behaviour and
desires, both sexual and otherwise, as well as masculine physical
characteristics, may reasonably be assumed to have emanated,
directly or indirectly, the fact that the psychological sex is male is in
my opinion an adminicle of evidence of some importance.”
2. Bellinger
Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead made the following remarks in his speech:
“The indicia of human sex or gender (for present purposes the two
terms are interchangeable) can be listed, in no particular order, as
follows. (1) Chromosomes: XY pattern in males, XX in females. (2)
Gonads: testes in males, ovaries in females. (3) Internal sex organs
other than the gonads: for instance, sperm ducts in males, uterus

4104864/2024 Page 303
in females. (4) External genitalia. (5) Hormonal patterns and
secondary sexual characteristics, such as facial hair and body
shape: no one suggests these criteria should be a primary factor in
assigning sex. (6) Style of upbringing and living. (7) Self-perception.
Some medical research has suggested that this factor is not
exclusively psychological. Rather, it is associated with biological
differentiation within the brain. The research has been very limited,
and in the present state of neuroscience the existence of such an
association remains speculative…….
Transsexual is the label given, not altogether happily, to a person
who has the misfortune to be born with physical characteristics
which are congruent but whose self-belief is incongruent.
Transsexual people are born with the anatomy of a person of one
sex but with an unshakeable belief or feeling that they are persons
of the opposite sex. They experience themselves as being of the
opposite sex………
Recognition of gender reassignment will involve some blurring of
the normally accepted biological distinction between male and
female. Some blurring already exists, unavoidably, in the case of
inter-sexual persons. When assessing the gender of inter-sexual
persons, matters taken into account include self-perception and
style of upbringing and living. Recognition of gender reassignment
will involve further blurring. It will mean that in law a person who,
unlike an inter-sexual person, had all the biological characteristics
of one sex at birth may subsequently be treated as a member of
the opposite sex……
It is questionable whether the successful completion of some sort
of surgical intervention should be an essential prerequisite to the
recognition of gender reassignment. If it were, individuals may find
themselves coerced into major surgical operations they otherwise
would not have. But the aim of the surgery is to make the individual
feel more comfortable with his or her body, not to “turn a man into
a woman” or vice versa. As one medical report has expressed it, a
male to female transsexual person is no less a woman for not
having had surgery, or any more a woman for having had it: see
Secretary, Department of Social Security v SRA (1993) 118 ALR
467, 477.
These are deep waters. Plainly, there must be some objective,
publicly available criteria by which gender reassignment is to be
assessed. If possible the criteria should be capable of being applied
readily so as to produce a reasonably clear answer. “
Lord Hope of Craighead in his speech considered that a complete change
of sex from male to female was not possible as some characteristics of

4104864/2024 Page 304
the original sex such as chromosomes remained, and he made the
following remarks:
“The essence of the problem, as I see it, lies in the impossibility of
changing completely the sex which individuals acquire when they
are born. A great deal can be done to remove the physical features
of the sex from which the transsexual wishes to escape and to
reproduce those of the sex which he or she wishes to acquire. The
body can be altered to produce all the characteristics that the
individual needs to feel comfortable, and there are no steps that
cannot be taken to adopt a way of life that will enable him or her to
enter into a satisfactory and loving heterosexual relationship. But
medical science is unable, in its present state, to complete the
process. It cannot turn a man into a woman or turn a woman into a
man. That is not what the treatment seeks to do after all, although
it is described as gender reassignment surgery. It is not just that
the chromosomes that are present at birth are incapable of being
changed. The surgery, however extensive and elaborate, cannot
supply all the equipment that would be needed for the patient to
play the part which the sex to which he or she wishes to belong
normally plays in having children. At best, what is provided is no
more than an imitation of the more obvious parts of that equipment.
Although it is often described as a sex change, the process is
inevitably incomplete. A complete change of sex is, strictly
speaking, unachievable………
I need hardly say that I entirely agree with the Australian judges
that the words “male” and “female” in section 11(c) of the 1973 Act
[the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973], which is the provision with
which we are faced in this case, are not technical terms and that
they must be given their ordinary, everyday meaning in the English
language. But no evidence was placed before us to suggest that in
contemporary usage in this country, on whichever date one might
wish to select-23 May 1973 when the 1973 Act was enacted, 2 May
1981 when Mr and Mrs Bellinger entered into their marriage
ceremony or the date of this judgment, these words can be taken
to include post-operative transsexual persons. The definition of
“male” in the New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (1993) tells us
that its primary meaning when used as an adjective is “of,
pertaining to, or designating the sex which can beget offspring”. No
mention is made anywhere in the extended definition of the word of
transsexual persons. The word “transsexual” is defined as “having
the physical characteristics of one sex but a strong and persistent
desire to belong to the other”. I see no escape from the conclusion
that these definitions, with which the decision in Corbett v Corbett
[1971] P 83 and the views of the majority in the Court of Appeal in
this case are consistent, are both complete and accurate. The fact

4104864/2024 Page 305
is that the ordinary meaning of the word “male” is incapable, without
more, of accommodating the transsexual person within its scope.
The Australian cases show that a distinction has to be drawn, even
according to the contemporary usage of the word in Australia,
between pre-operative and post-operative transsexuals.
Distinctions of that kind raise questions of fact and degree which
are absent from the ordinary meaning of the word “male” in this
country. Any attempt to enlarge its meaning would be bound to lead
to difficulty, as there is no single agreed criterion by which it could
be determined whether or not a transsexual was sufficiently “male”
for the purpose of entering into a valid marriage ceremony.
In Goodwin v United Kingdom 35 EHRR 447, 474, paras 82–83 the
European Court of Human Rights noted that it remains the case, as
the court held in Sheffield and Horsham v United Kingdom 27
EHRR 163, that a transsexual cannot acquire all the biological
characteristics of the assigned sex. It went on to say that it was not
apparent in the light of increasingly sophisticated surgery and
hormonal techniques that the chromosomal element, which is the
principal unchanging biological aspect of gender identity, must
inevitably take on decisive significance for the purpose of legal
attribution of gender identity for post-operative transsexuals. So it
was not persuaded that the state of medical science or scientific
knowledge provided any determining argument as regards the legal
recognition of transsexuals on grounds of social and legal policy.
But this approach is not at all inconsistent with the view which I
would take of the facts. The question which the court was asking
itself was not whether the applicant, who was of the male sex when
she was born, was now female. Post-operative transsexuals were
assumed to fall into a distinct category. The question was whether
it was a breach of their Convention rights for legal recognition to be
denied to their new sexual identity.
Of course, it is not given to every man or every woman to have, or
to want to have, children. But the ability to reproduce one's own
kind lies at the heart of all creation, and the single characteristic
which invariably distinguishes the adult male from the adult female
throughout the animal kingdom is the part which each sex plays in
the act of reproduction. When Parliament used the words “male”
and female” in section 11(c) of the 1973 Act it must be taken to
have used those words in the sense which they normally have
when they are used to describe a person's sex, even though they
are plainly capable of including men and women who happen to be
infertile or are past the age of child bearing. I think that section
5(4)(e) of the Marriage (Scotland) Act 1977, which provides there
is a legal impediment to a marriage in Scots law where the parties
“are of the same sex”, has to be read and understood in the same

4104864/2024 Page 306
way. I do not see how, on the ordinary methods of interpretation,
the words “male” and “female” in section 11(c) of the 1973 Act can
be interpreted as including female to male and male to female
transsexuals.”
3. Croft
Lord Justice Pill said the following:
“The primary submissions of both parties are, as Mr Rose put it,
counterintuitive. It produces a surprising result if the applicant, at
the material time, could be required to use a male toilet, but,
submits Mr Rose, it is no less counterintuitive to find that a person
who is anatomically male must be treated, for toileting purposes, as
female, if she asserts a female role. A voyeur or transvestite might
do that. Mr Rose relies upon the view of Lord Hope in Bellinger
(paragraph 62) that a distinction has to be drawn between pre-
operative and post-operative transsexuals. 'Any attempt to enlarge
its meaning [the meaning of the word 'male' in this context] would
be bound to lead to difficulty as there is no single agreed criterion
by which it could be determined whether or not a transsexual was
sufficiently “male” for the purpose of entering into a valid marriage
ceremony.' Lord Hobhouse stated, at paragraph 76, that 'there are
cogent arguments against adopting any specific criterion' when
deciding 'how far the person must go to qualify as a transsexual'.
Accepting that it is for Parliament to lay down the test of sexuality
as provided in Bellinger, the court has to consider a current and
practical problem about the use of lavatories. Pending any action
by Parliament, the court must attempt to resolve the question and I
agree with the submission of Mr Rose about the unattractiveness
of the primary submission of each party. To hold that the applicant
must still use the male toilets is no less unacceptable than allowing
a person, who has been known to the female workforce as a man
for many years and has male genitals, an immediate right to use
the female toilets. While the good faith of the applicant in this case
in wishing to be a woman is not in doubt, the gender test is open to
abuse and, quite apart from that, what Lord Nicholls described as
self-definition presents a serious practical problem in this
context…….
By virtue of the definition in s.82 of the Act, the category includes
persons at all stages of gender reassignment under medical
supervision but it does not follow that all such persons are entitled
immediately to be treated as members of the sex to which they
aspire. Nor does it follow that, until the final stage is reached, they
can necessarily be required, in relation to lavatories, to behave as

4104864/2024 Page 307
if they were not undergoing gender reassignment. Given the
unacceptability of either approach the court must consider what
amounts to less favourable treatment in the context of a person
within the definition in s.82 and whether any such less favourable
treatment is on the ground that the applicant is undergoing gender
reassignment.
The basic points are:
(i) At the material time the applicant was a transsexual.
(ii) She had reached the stage of gender reassignment
where she had begun, but not long begun, to present as a
woman attempting a 'real life test'
(iii) The applicant was in good faith in wishing to become
female…..”
The decision also included the following analysis:
“Transsexuals have been recognised by statute, not as a third sex,
but as a group who must not be discriminated against as such. That
involves not only providing members of the group with toilet
facilities no less commodious than other toilets but considering
whether the transsexual should be granted the choice she seeks. I
would accept, applying the statement of Lord Nicholls in Bellinger,
paragraph 41, and Goodwin paragraph 90, that a permanent
refusal to refuse that choice to someone presenting to the world as
a woman could be an act of discrimination even if the person had
not undergone the final surgical intervention.
However, I do not accept that a formerly male employee can, by
presenting as female, necessarily and immediately assert the right
to use female toilets. The status of transsexual does not
automatically entitle the employee to be treated as a woman, with
respect to toilet facilities. The right does not arise automatically but
it is acquired by making progress in the procedure described by
Lord Nicholls. The tribunal has to make a judgment as to when the
employee becomes a woman and entitled to the same facilities as
other women though that judgment must have regard to the
applicant's self-definition and cannot be determined by the views of
other employees.
The employee did not have less favourable treatment than a man,
who could not claim to use the female toilets. The employee is not
being treated less favourably than other women employees unless
and until the employee can establish that she should be treated as
a woman. The court should have regard to the particular difficulties
which arise with respect to toilet facilities, the obligation and the

4104864/2024 Page 308
need for separate facilities for men and women, and the fact that
acquiring the status of a transsexual does not carry with it the right
to choose which toilets to use.
With respect to other facilities, the employee's self-definition may
be a very important factor in determining the sex in which the
employee is entitled to be treated. In the case of toilet facilities, for
reasons given, it is less important and the employer is not bound
by it when making a judgment as to when the change has occurred.
For most purposes, s.2A of the 1975 Act permits a clear application.
With respect to toilet facilities, there is a problem in that separate
facilities for men and women have to be provided. Transsexuals
are not a third sex. In any event, providing a third set of toilets for
transsexuals would not solve the problem about which the applicant
complains. She presents as a female and wishes to use the female
toilets. The respondents submit that anatomically she is male and
cannot complain if she is not permitted to use the female toilets.
The applicant has reached a stage of gender reassignment at
which the problems of recognition, analysed by Lord Nicholls in
Bellinger, are difficult to solve and particularly with respect to toilet
facilities, for reasons already given. The choice claimed is different
from the choice of schools considered in Birmingham because toilet
facilities are necessarily sexually based. Presentation as a female
does not necessarily make the applicant a female entitled to use
female toilet facilities. Such presentation does not enable her to
claim sexual discrimination because she is not permitted to
exercise a female's right to use the female lavatories (as a male's
to use the male lavatories). Moreover, she is not discriminated
against 'on the ground' that she is undergoing gender
reassignment. The toilet facilities are accepted to be adequate; it is
the label they are given which is claimed to be unacceptable.
Statute recognises the existence of a category of persons
undergoing gender reassignment which includes the applicant, but
that very recognition militates against her being entitled
automatically to claim that, as well as being transsexual, she is a
female entitled to all the choices which females have. It is in my
judgment inherent in a situation in which two sets of facilities, male
and female, are required and in which a category of persons
changing from one sex to the other is recognised, that there must
be a period during which the employer is entitled to make separate
arrangements for those undergoing the change.
What those arrangements are must inevitably depend on the
circumstances and both employer and employee must recognise
the difficulties involved and act reasonably to overcome them. The

4104864/2024 Page 309
employer must respect the dignity and freedom of the employee (P
v S, paragraph 22) and must enable the employee 'to live in dignity
and worth' (Goodwin, paragraph 91). However, I see nothing
unlawful, having regard to the stage reached by the applicant, that
is the step of embarking on the 'real life test' expected by doctors
usually to last for two years, in requiring the use of separate
facilities.
The moment at which a person in the applicant's position is entitled
to use female toilets depends on all the circumstances, including
her conduct and that of the employers. The employers must take
into account the stage reached in treatment, including the
employee's own assessment and presentation. They are entitled to
take into account, though not to be governed by, the susceptibilities
of other members of the workforce. She must not be treated less
favourably than other employed transsexuals but that is not in issue
in this case. Her complaint is that being treated less favourably than
the female workforce requires prior determination of the question
whether she is entitled to be treated as a female, an approach
reinforced by the statutory recognition of the existence of
transsexuals.”
Lord Justice Jonathan Parker added that “In my judgment the true
comparators in the circumstances of the instant case are employees of
the respondent (whether male or female) who are not persons to whom
s.2A applies: that is to say, employees of either sex who are not
transsexual.” The second was whether a requirement that for the time
being the claimant use disabled facilities not the female toilet was not less
favourable treatment:
“I am quite unable to see how the requirement that for the time
being the applicant use the disabled facilities, rather than the
female facilities, could be said to constitute less favourable
treatment of the applicant for the purposes of s.2A(1). On the
contrary, it seems to me that it provided an admirably practical
solution to what the respondent rightly recognised, and rightly
treated, as a delicate issue requiring a low-key and sensitive
approach.”
4. Higgs
The Court of Appeal also stated the following:
“The protection of the right of free speech, including speech
expressing a person’s religious or other beliefs, has always been
regarded as a cardinal principle of the common law, and it is of
course now also protected by the incorporation by the 1998 Act of

4104864/2024 Page 310
articles 9 and 10 of the Convention. There are many decisions of
the highest authority expounding the relevant principles, but I do
not need to recapitulate them here. I only note three points to which
Mr O’Dair, and the FSU in its written submissions, attached
particular importance.
First, freedom of speech necessarily entails the freedom to express
opinions that may shock and offend. The most authoritative
statement to this effect is probably that of the ECtHR at para. 46 of
its judgment in Vajnai v. Hungary [2008] ECHR 1910, where it said:
“The Court further reiterates that freedom of expression, as
secured in Article 10 §1 of the Convention, constitutes one
of the essential foundations of a democratic society and one
of the basic conditions for its progress and for each
individual’s self-fulfilment. Subject to Article 10 §2, it is
applicable not only to ‘information’ or ‘ideas’ that are
favourably received or regarded as inoffensive or as a matter
of indifference, but also to those which offend, shock or
disturb; such are the demands of pluralism, tolerance and
broad-mindedness, without which there is no ‘democratic
society’ … . Although freedom of expression may be subject
to exceptions, they ‘must be narrowly interpreted’ and ‘the
necessity for any restrictions must be convincingly
established’ (see, for instance, Observer and Guardian v the
United Kingdom, 26 November 1991, §59, Series A no.
216).”
A very frequently-cited domestic authority to the same effect is
Redmond-Bate v Director of Public Prosecutions [1999] EWHC
Admin 733, where Sedley LJ, sitting with Collins J in the Divisional
Court said, at para. 20:
“Free speech includes not only the inoffensive but the
irritating, the contentious, the eccentric, the heretical, the
unwelcome and the provocative … Freedom only to speak
inoffensively is not worth having ...”
Second, the protection of freedom of speech is particularly
important in the case of “political speech” – that is, expression of
opinion on matters of public and political interest. At para. 47 of its
judgment in Vajnai the ECtHR stressed “that there is little scope
under Article 10 §2 of the Convention for restrictions on political
speech or on the debate of questions of public interest”.
Third, in any given case it is important to be alive not just to the
effect of restrictions on freedom of speech in that case but to their

4104864/2024 Page 311
chilling effect more widely. In R (Miller) v College of Policing [2021]
EWCA Civ 1926, [2022] 1 WLR 4987, Sharp P said, at para. 68:
“The concept of a chilling effect in the context of freedom of
expression is an extremely important one. It often arises in
discussions about what if any restrictions on journalistic
activity are lawful; but in my judgment it is equally important
when considering the rights of private citizens to express
their views within the limits of the law, including and one
might say in particular, on controversial matters of public
interest.”
These are principles which any court or tribunal must have at the
forefront of its mind in considering a case involving freedom of
speech, including the expression of religious or other beliefs. It
should be noted, however, that in each of those cases the Court
was concerned with limitations on free speech imposed by a public
authority. The present case is concerned with an interference with
free speech on the part of an employer against an employee, and
it is necessary to assess whether the interference was justified in
the context of the employment relationship and the law applicable
to it. The relevant principles in such a case were considered by this
Court in the case of Page v NHS Trust Development Authority
[2021] EWCA Civ 255, [2021] ICR 941, which was central to the
decision of the EAT and to which I now turn.”
5. Lilliendahl
The ECtHR said the following
“The Supreme Court held that the applicant’s comments, which
were made publicly, were “serious, severely hurtful and prejudicial”
and that protecting certain groups from such attacks to ensure their
enjoyment of their human rights equally to others was compatible
with the national democratic tradition. It also reasoned that the
comments had little to no relevance to criticism of the municipal
council’s decision and that their prejudicial content was by no
means necessary for the applicant to engage in the ongoing public
discussion. It therefore found that the private life interests at play in
the case outweighed the applicant’s freedom of expression in the
circumstances of the case and that curbing that freedom was both
justified and necessary in order to counteract the sort of prejudice,
hatred and contempt against certain social groups which his
comments could promote (see paragraphs 16-17 above).
The Court accepts the finding of the Supreme Court that the
applicant’s comments were “serious, severely hurtful and

4104864/2024 Page 312
prejudicial”. In this context, the Court recalls that discrimination
based on sexual orientation is as serious as discrimination based
on “race, origin or colour” (see, inter alia, Smith and Grady v. the
United Kingdom, nos. 33985/96 and 33986/96, § 97, ECHR
1999-VI). Furthermore, both statutory bodies of the Council of
Europe have called for the protection of gender and sexual
minorities from hateful and discriminatory speech (see paragraphs
21-22 above), citing the marginalization and victimization to which
they have historically been, and continue to be, subjected.
As the Supreme Court noted, the prejudicial and intolerant nature
of the comments – which were made publicly – does not seem to
have been justified or triggered by the municipal decision which
originally sparked the debate. Against this background, and in the
circumstances of the case, the Court finds that the Supreme Court
gave relevant and sufficient reasons for the applicant’s conviction.
Furthermore, the Court notes that the applicant was not sentenced
to imprisonment, although the crime of which he was convicted
carries a penalty of up to two years’ imprisonment. Instead, a fine
of approximately EUR 800 was imposed on him. The Court does
not find this penalty excessive in the circumstances.
In view of the above, the Court finds that the Supreme Court took
into account the criteria set out in the Court’s case-law and acted
within its margin of appreciation. The Court considers that the
Supreme Court’s assessment of the nature and severity of the
comments was not manifestly unreasonable (see, a contrario, Egill
Einarsson v. Iceland, no. 24703/15, § 52, 17 November 2017) and
it adequately balanced the applicant’s personal interests against
the more general public interest in the case encompassing the
rights of gender and sexual minorities. Therefore, in light of its
existing case-law and the principle of subsidiarity (see paragraph
31 above), it is not for the Court to substitute its own assessment
of the merits for that of the Supreme Court. Thus, no strong reasons
militate in favour of the Court reaching a different conclusion.
The Court therefore finds the complaint under Article 10 of the
Convention to be manifestly ill-founded and rejects it in accordance
with Article 35 §§ 3 (a) and 4 of the Convention.”
Date sent to parties: 8 December 2025