Case Number: 6001795/2025
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant: Mr N Luhar
Respondent: Merrill Lynch International
Sitting at: London Central (by CVP) On: 1st August 2025
Before: Employment Judge Nicklin (sitting alone)
Representation
Claimant: in person
Respondent: Mr C Kelly, Counsel
JUDGMENT ON PRELIMINARY
HEARING
1. The Claimant has compromised all and any complaints he seeks to bring in this
claim by reason of a signed settlement agreement dated 22nd August 2024 (“the
Settlement Agreement”).
2. The Claimant has no reasonable prospect of success in contending that he is
not bound by the Settlement Agreement.
3. The claim is struck out in accordance with Rule 38(1)(a) of the 2024 Rules.
REASONS
Background
1. By a claim form presented on 17th January 2025, the Claimant brought claims of
unfair dismissal and discrimination based on race and sex and disability
discrimination by association in respect of the termination of his employment with
the Respondent which had commenced on 24th January 2022 and ended on 22nd
August 2024.
1

Case Number: 6001795/2025
2. It is not in dispute that the termination of the Claimant’s employment arose by the
conclusion of a settlement agreement signed by the parties and dated 22nd August
2024 (“the Settlement Agreement”). The Settlement Agreement, on its face,
compromised any and all of the claims which the Claimant now seeks to bring to
the tribunal. The Claimant contends that he is not bound by the Settlement
Agreement and, accordingly, may proceed with this claim. The Respondent relies
on the Settlement Agreement and, in the circumstances, by its solicitor’s letter of
17th March 2025, applied to strike out the claim on the ground that it has no
reasonable prospect of success.
3. I was the procedural judge who conducted an initial consideration of this claim
under Rule 27 of the Employment Tribunal Procedure Rules 2024 (“the 2024
Rules”). Conducting that review, I converted the preliminary hearing listed for case
management on 1st August 2025 to proceed as an extended preliminary hearing in
public (by CVP) to determine the Respondent’s application to strike out.
4. At the beginning of the hearing, I decided that it was necessary to hear an
outstanding case management application in private (which had not been resolved
by a duty judge prior to the hearing). A separate case management order will be
sent to the parties concerning the application that was heard and decided.
5. I then converted the hearing back to a hearing in public in order to proceed with
the Respondent’s strike out application (in accordance with Rule 54(2) of the 2024
Rules). Any members of the public wishing to observe the hearing were then
notified that they could re-join if they wished to do so by the tribunal clerk. Both
parties were able to make submissions on the application and I had the benefit of
reading a hearing bundle running to 124 pages. I have also considered all of the
documents provided in advance of the hearing by the Claimant, to include a
timeline of events.
6. At the outset of the public hearing, the Respondent explained that its application
was put on the basis of ‘no reasonable prospect of success’ (Rule 38(1)(a) of the
2024 Rules), as set out in the letter of application, but could also be advanced
under Rule 38(1)(b) (the manner in which the proceedings have been conducted
by the Claimant is scandalous, unreasonable or vexatious).
7. As the basis of the Claimant’s submission on the Settlement Agreement is that
there were events occurring just prior to the agreement being signed which should
be considered to have vitiated the agreement (rather than this being a claim which
otherwise ignores or denies the operation of the agreement), the proper application
of the strike out test is under Rule 38(1)(a) since I must decide whether the
Claimant has a reasonable prospect of success in establishing that, on his own
factual case at its highest, the Settlement Agreement ought to be found
unenforceable. This involves consideration as to whether the Settlement
Agreement complies with the requirements in section 203(1) of the Employment
Rights Act 1996 (“ERA”) (and similar legislation) and the events alleged by the
Claimant prior to concluding the agreement. Further and in any event, the
application was not advanced in writing prior to the hearing on the footing that it
was put within Rule 38(1)(b) and so the Claimant was not given notice of strike out
being sought on that basis. I therefore consider that, in accordance with the
2

Case Number: 6001795/2025
overriding objective, the application is squarely an application under Rule 38(1)(a)
and I shall assess it, below, on that basis.
Strike out – Rule 38(1)(a)
8. The rule, so far as relevant provides:
The Tribunal may, on its own initiative or on the application of a party, strike out
all or part of a claim, response or reply on any of the following grounds—
(a) that it is scandalous or vexatious or has no reasonable prospect of
success…
9. In this case, it is important to make clear that the tribunal is not considering whether
the Claimant’s claim has no reasonable prospect of success based on the ordinary
merits of the complaints about the Claimant’s treatment during his employment.
There are a number of factors to be considered on an application to strike out in
such a case. In particular, where an application to strike out a discrimination claim
is made, the tribunal must be cautious not to strike out a claim based on fact
sensitive matters except in the most obvious of cases (Anyanwu v South Bank
Students Union [2001] UKHL 14; [2001] 1 WLR 638; and Ezsias v North
Glamorgan NHS Trust [2007] ICR 1126).
10. In this case, the application is framed entirely on the Settlement Agreement,
meaning that, on the Respondent’s case, the tribunal does not even get as far as
considering how the Claimant says he was treated by the Respondent during his
employment because he has contractually compromised all of the claims he has
brought. Likewise, the Claimant accepts he did sign the Settlement Agreement
and, but for the events occurring prior to him signing the agreement, it would
otherwise bind the parties and prevent him from pursuing all of the complaints
forming this claim.
11. It is apparent that, were there no settlement agreement in this case, the tribunal
would not be in a position to consider whether to strike out on the merits of the
complaints at this stage because the detail about the allegations has not yet been
clarified. It was unnecessary to go through that process in these circumstances
because it is not being said that any of the complaints fall outside the scope of the
Settlement Agreement. The Claimant either has a reasonable prospect of success
in establishing that he is not bound by the Settlement Agreement or he does not.
On that basis, I considered that it was in accordance with the overriding objective
to consider the application at this preliminary stage.
Law
12. The statutory requirements for a settlement agreement to be binding for the
purposes of precluding a Claimant from being able to pursue claims to the
Employment Tribunal (as an exception to the rule that a Claimant cannot contract
out of their statutory rights) are set out in section 203(3) ERA. These are (in
summary):
3

Case Number: 6001795/2025
a. The agreement must be in writing;
b. It must relate to the particular proceedings;
c. The agreement must only be made where the employee has received
advice from a relevant independent adviser as to the terms and effect of the
agreement and, in particular, its effect on his or her ability to pursue his or
her rights before an Employment Tribunal and the adviser must have in
force, when the adviser gives the advice, a contract of insurance or an
indemnity provided for members of a professional body, covering the risk of
a claim by the employee in respect of loss arising in consequence of the
advice;
d. The agreement must identify the adviser; and
e. State that conditions regulating settlement agreements have been satisfied.
13. In respect of claims under the Equality Act 2010 (“EqA”), the requirements are
substantially the same as under the ERA but the requirements as to the statement
of compliance are less prescriptive. The requirements as to the agreement will
nevertheless be met where the parties conclude an agreement which has complied
with section 203 ERA (see sections 144(4) and 147(3)(f) EqA).
14. As to the Claimant’s challenge to the Settlement Agreement, this is based on an
allegation of economic duress. He says that he had no choice but to sign the
Settlement Agreement as he required the proposed extended medical cover
offered by the Respondent as part of the settlement package. The Respondent
referred the tribunal to the following two authorities on this issue. Firstly, Hennessy
v Craigmyle & Co Ltd [1986] ICR 461 and, secondly, Times Travel (UK) Limited
and Anr v Pakistan International Airlines Corporation [2021] UKSC 40; [2023] AC
101.
15. The relevant principles for establishing economic duress (as set out in detail in
Times Travel) are:
a. Economic duress is only a ground for avoidance of a contract if the
contractor’s will was overborne so that it could be said that his consent was
vitiated because he had no real alternative (Hennessy). In particular, as set
out in Times Travel, there must be:
i. The making of an illegitimate threat by one party;
ii. Sufficient causation between the threat and the threatened party
entering into the contract or making the non-contractual payment;
and
iii. The lack of any reasonable alternative to the threatened party giving
in to the threat.
b. Illegitimacy of the threat is determined by consideration as to:
4

Case Number: 6001795/2025
i. the nature and justification of the demand made by the threatening
party having regard to, amongst other things, the behaviour of the
threatening party (including the nature of the pressure applied) and
the circumstances of the threatened party. In general, commercial
self interest in bargaining is justified; and
ii. whether there was the kind of morally reprehensible behaviour or
unconscionable conduct which, in the context of the equitable
concept of undue influence, rendered enforcement of the contract
(i.e. the settlement) unconscionable (Times Travel, per Lord Hodge
and the majority of the court).
c. Whether there was economic duress was a question of fact for the
employment tribunal (Hennessy).
The Settlement Agreement
16. The Settlement Agreement is dated 22nd August 2024 and is signed by the
Claimant and on behalf of the Respondent. So far as relevant, the Settlement
Agreement:
a. Provides for a termination date of 22nd August 2024. The parties agree that
the Claimant’s employment ended on this date by reason of this Settlement
Agreement.
b. Agrees to settle any claims which the Claimant has or may have in
connection with his employment, its termination or otherwise against the
Respondent or the Banking Group of which it is a part.
c. Provides for the Claimant’s payments on termination as to salary and unpaid
holiday entitlement and any other contractual entitlements up to the
termination of his employment. There is no suggestion these have not been
paid in accordance with the Claimant’s entitlement.
d. Provides for a compensation payment, a payment in lieu of notice, and a
further modest payment as consideration for the Claimant’s obligations as
to confidentiality and protective covenants to be made to the Claimant within
31 days of termination and the date on which the Respondent receives the
scanned signed documents under the agreement. The Claimant accepts
this was duly paid.
e. At clause 4.2 thereof, the Respondent agreed: “Subject to the Employee
signing this agreement, the Bank will agree to continue the private medical
insurance cover that the Employee currently benefits from for a period of 12
weeks from the Termination Date until 14 November 2024, subject always
to the terms and conditions of the relevant scheme and cover”.
5

Case Number: 6001795/2025
f. At clause 13 thereof, the Claimant agreed to waive his claims. In particular:
i. The Claimant agreed he will not “…institute any legal or dispute
resolution proceedings whether under common law, contract,
legislation or otherwise in any country or jurisdiction, in respect of the
claims set out in Schedule 1 (the “Relevant Claims”)” (clause 13.1);
ii. Before signing the agreement, the Claimant acknowledged that he
had disclosed to a relevant independent adviser all facts and
circumstances that give rise to a claim against the Respondent or its
officers or employees (or against any company in its Group) (clause
13.4.1); and
iii. The Claimant confirmed that he had received independent advice
from the relevant independent adviser and, in particular, the terms
and effect of the Settlement Agreement on his ability to pursue his
rights before an Employment Tribunal (clause 13.4.2).
g. The Claimant warranted, at clause 10.1.4 of the Settlement Agreement that,
amongst other things, he will not present a claim to the Employment Tribunal
in connection with his employment or its termination (save as provided for
in clause 13.3, which covers matters such as accrued pension rights,
enforcement of the agreement (although that would be a matter for a civil
court), personal injury claims and future claims where no act or omissions
had yet occurred).
h. The parties agreed (at clause 14 thereof) that the conditions as to a
settlement agreement under the EqA or the ERA applied and were satisfied
in relation to the Settlement Agreement.
i. At Schedule 1 of the Settlement Agreement, all of the claims presented in
the Claimant’s ET1 claim form in these proceedings are covered by the list
of claims waived by the Settlement Agreement.
17. Accompanying the Settlement Agreement is the relevant independent adviser’s
certificate dated 1st August 2024. This was signed by a solicitor at the Birmingham
office of Mills & Reeve LLP. There is no suggestion that the adviser does not meet
the statutory definition to perform the advisory function or that the certificate does
not certify the matters required.
The Claimant’s challenge to the Settlement Agreement
18. The Claimant accepts that, on the face of it, he has signed a binding Settlement
Agreement which waives the claims he has brought. He takes no point as to the
Settlement Agreement’s compliance with the statutory requirements.
6

Case Number: 6001795/2025
19. The singular ground of challenge is that the Claimant contends that he was
effectively forced into signing the agreement, in circumstances where he had
otherwise resolved not to do so, because of a last-minute stipulation by the
Respondent that, in order to receive 12 weeks’ continuing medical cover (under
the Respondent’s scheme available to employees and their families) he must enter
into the Settlement Agreement. This benefit was included at clause 4.2 of the
Settlement Agreement after the Claimant had received advice from Mills & Reeve
LLP on or before 1st August 2024.
20. Assuming the Claimant’s evidence is accepted at final hearing, at its highest, the
Claimant says about duress:
a. He was not going to sign the Settlement Agreement after he had received
advice from Mills & Reeve LLP.
b. The Claimant was subject to a redundancy procedure and, during this
process, he says it had been agreed with the Respondent that he would
receive 12 weeks’ continued medical cover after being made redundant
(without entering into any settlement agreement). Accordingly, he says he
was expecting to be able to refuse the proposed settlement, his employment
would terminate by reason of redundancy and, along with any redundancy
payment(s), he would have 12 weeks’ continuing medical cover thereafter.
c. The Claimant wanted the extended medical cover because of family illness.
He says that the Respondent knew that this was important to him and that
he or his family would make use of this benefit during the remaining insured
period. There was, therefore, significant personal reliance on having this
extended insurance as it would likely cover a planned medical procedure.
d. On 1st August 2024, the Claimant was told by email that: a.) the agreement
was non-negotiable (it was effectively a ‘take it’ or ‘leave it’ situation); and
b.) in order to secure the 12 weeks’ cover as a benefit following termination
of employment, he will need to sign the Settlement Agreement (and clause
4.2 covering this benefit was duly added to a second draft).
e. The Claimant does not allege that any direct threat was made to him. He
says the Respondent simply knew of his personal circumstances requiring
the cover and made the extended benefit conditional upon him signing the
Settlement Agreement. He did not want to sign and did so, he says,
because he felt he had no choice in order to secure the medical cover.
f. He accepted at the time that, by signing the Settlement Agreement, he was
giving up his claims and would not be able to pursue them. However, he
acted in order to secure the medical cover and only later considered that the
circumstances amounted to duress.
7

Case Number: 6001795/2025
Discussion and Conclusions on the Application
21. In my judgment, there is no reasonable prospect of any part of the Claimant’s claim
succeeding before the Employment Tribunal. This is because:
a. The parties have entered into a binding contract of settlement which
complies with the statutory requirements for the contracting out of an
employee’s statutory rights under the EqA and ERA. The Claimant accepts
he signed the Settlement Agreement and received the advice from Mills &
Reeve LLP as a relevant independent adviser. On or around 5th August
2024, he returned the signed Settlement Agreement to the Respondent
together with the signed certificate (in the form prescribed by Schedule 2 of
the Settlement Agreement) from Mills & Reeve LLP. Taken together and
then counter signed by the Respondent, these documents constituted the
necessary steps to create a binding settlement agreement which:
i. Is in writing;
ii. Relates to the particular proceedings. The Claimant was, at that time
in August 2024, contemplating claims in respect of the termination of
his employment and treatment at work and these are covered within
Schedule 1 of the Settlement Agreement;
iii. Includes the Claimant having received advice as to the terms and
effect of the agreement and his ability to pursue claims waived by it
(including certification of that fact and that insurance was in place
covering the advice given by Mills & Reeve LLP);
iv. Identifies the relevant independent adviser in the certification
attached to the Settlement Agreement; and
v. The agreement states that the statutory conditions have been
satisfied (at clause 14 of the Settlement Agreement).
b. In any event, the Claimant does not take any point as to compliance with
the statutory requirements in respect of the claim and the arguments he now
brings to the tribunal. His contention is that the Settlement Agreement is
voidable for economic duress.
c. The Claimant does not have a reasonable prospect of success in
establishing that he was forced by illegitimate threat into the Settlement
Agreement. He does not contend that the Respondent did anything other
than propose, on or around 1st August 2024, that the 12 weeks’ medical
cover benefit would be included in the settlement package if he proceeded
to sign the agreement. At its highest, he complains that it was unfair that
this had already been offered to him as a benefit in his redundancy if his
employment was terminated for that reason and not by an agreement.
d. Assuming he could have established the above promise on evidence at a
final hearing (in circumstances where he did not enter into a Settlement
Agreement), he may have had a remedy for a lost but agreed benefit arising
from any unfair dismissal. Alternatively, he might have had a contractual
claim as to a benefit promised but not delivered. However, the fact that, on
the Claimant’s case, the Respondent denied or otherwise withdrew any
promise of medical cover benefit after redundancy (i.e. where there was no
8

Case Number: 6001795/2025
settlement) and then offered this as a condition of the Settlement Agreement
does not amount, by any degree, to an illegitimate threat.
e. The Claimant had a choice. It may have been an unattractive choice in
August 2024 as to whether he should accept the settlement and receive the
offered medical cover in clause 4.2 or whether he should refuse, be made
redundant and pursue claims in the Employment Tribunal to include any
loss of medical cover (as a benefit) on redundancy if he considered his
dismissal was unfair. However, that does not mean that there was an
illegitimate threat in the Respondent offering to add a condition (and an
extended benefit) to its offer in order to encourage the Claimant to conclude
the agreement. Further, there was an alternative (as explained above) even
if that may not have assisted the Claimant at the time in respect of his or his
family’s need for the medical cover.
f. This is a case where the Claimant has concluded, by himself, that he felt
that he had no option but to ‘take the deal’ so as to be able to avail himself
of the medical cover, whilst aware of the consequences of so doing following
the independent advice. There is insufficient causation between his own
conclusion and any action (amounting to an illegitimate threat) on the part
of the Respondent. The behaviour of the Respondent is that they offered
him a benefit; a further incentive to conclude the agreement. Even if it is
right that the Respondent had previously offered the same cover to extend
after redundancy if he was dismissed, any withdrawal of that does not, in
my judgment, come close to amounting to morally reprehensible conduct
rendering the Settlement Agreement unconscionable. At best, as set out
above, it may have amounted to a contractual claim on termination to
recover a benefit he says was agreed or a remedy in any unfair dismissal
claim. The Claimant gave up such claims by entering into the Settlement
Agreement and, accordingly, secured an additional benefit beyond that
which had previously been offered within the terms of the agreement.
g. I have had regard to the fact that the Claimant received his independent
advice from Mills & Reeve LLP prior to the additional benefit being added at
paragraph 4.2. Counsel for the Respondent informed the tribunal that he is
not aware of any authority affecting the enforceability of a settlement
agreement where a benefit is added in this way after the advice. In my
judgment, there is no reasonable prospect of this point affecting the
enforceability of the Settlement Agreement. The independent advice
covered the terms and effect of the agreement and the impact on the
Claimant’s ability to pursue claims waived by it. He acknowledges he was
aware of those provisions and the certificate from Mills & Reeve LLP
confirms this advice was given. The requirement for the advice under the
ERA and EqA does not extend to advice as to whether a particular benefit
should or should not be offered in ‘the deal’ and/or whether the Claimant
ought to accept those terms.
22. Accordingly, for the above reasons, the Claimant’s claim does not have any
reasonable prospect of success and must therefore be struck out.
9

Case Number: 6001795/2025
_________________________________
Employment Judge Nicklin
_________________________________
Date: 3rd September 2025
JUDGMENT & REASONS SENT TO THE PARTIES ON
5 September 2025
........................................................................................
........................................................................................