Case Number: 6002405/2024
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant: Mr I. Obumneme
Respondent: Arriva Rail London Ltd
Heard at: East London Hearing Centre
On: 1-4 July 2025
Before: Employment Judge Massarella
Representation
Claimant: In person
Respondent: Dr Ahmed (Counsel)
REASONS
1. Judgment was sent to the parties on 21 July 2025. Written reasons were
requested in accordance with Rule 60 of the Employment Tribunal Procedure
Rules 2024 on 18 July 2024 and are provided below.
Procedural history
2. There was a preliminary hearing before me on 9 September 2024, at which I
began the process of clarifying the issues and listed a further hearing.
3. There was a further preliminary hearing before EJ Park on 18 December 2024,
at which she finalised the issues for determination. The Claimant decided not to
pursue as legal claims some historic matters, although he did rely on one of
them as background to his live claims.
4. At a preliminary hearing on 27 February 2025, EJ Volkmer found that the
Claimant was disabled by reason of depression and anxiety within the meaning
of section 6 of the Equality Act 2010 at the relevant time (December 2023 and
September 2024).
5. In correspondence in April 2025, Claimant raised an issue about a document
which he wished to be included in the bundle; he also wished to amend his case
to add an additional claim arising out of the document; the Respondent objected
1

Case Number: 6002405/2024
on the grounds that the document was covered by legal privilege. That
application was dealt with on the papers by EJ Allen KC, who wrote to the parties
refusing to permit the Claimant to rely on the document, refusing the application
to amend, ordering that the hearing on 1 July 2024 go ahead as scheduled, and
ordering that the document in question should not be placed before the Tribunal
hearing the case, which it was not. Unfortunately, owing to an administrative
error, that decision was not attached to the email purporting to send it to the
parties. They did not realise that a decision had been taken and came prepared
to deal with the application this morning. I provided them with copies of the letter
at the hearing and explained that, should the Claimant wish to challenge EJ
Allen’s decision, either by way of a reconsideration application or an appeal,
time for doing so would run from the date on which it was sent to him. I arranged
for that to happen the following morning.
6. On 23 June 2025, EJ Moor dealt with the Claimant’s application for witness
orders, which she refused. She ordered that two other applications he had made
should be left to the hearing. Of these, only the question of whether there was
a typographical error in EJ Park’s list of issues was dealt with by agreement on
the day: the reference to ‘Stage 2’ in Issue 4.2.1 was changed to ‘Stage 1’.
The hearing
7. I had a 403-page bundle of documents. I told the parties that I would read the
witness statements but that they would have to take me to any document in the
bundle which they wanted me to read; in relation to longer documents they could
ask me to put it on a reading list which I would work through in the course of the
hearing.
8. I heard evidence from the Claimant and, on behalf of the Respondent, from:
8.1. Ms Andrea Stone (Rostering Manager);
8.2. Ms Alesha Allen (HR Advisor);
8.3. Ms Oyinda Odusanya (Grievance Manager);
8.4. Ms Charlotte Whitfield (Appeal Manager).
9. I also had a statement from Mr Hitesh Patel, the Claimant’s line manager, who
did not attend the hearing. The only explanation given for his absence was that
he was on holiday. There was no evidence that his holiday was pre-booked; to
that extent it was an unsatisfactory explanation; I approached his evidence with
caution and, on some issues, gave it less weight than I would have done had
he attended to give evidence.
10. Dr Ahmad (Counsel for the Respondent) told me that knowledge of disability
and disadvantage was not conceded. He clarified the legitimate aims. The
issues in their final form are transcribed below into the underlined subheadings.
11. On the second day of the hearing the Claimant asked for additional breaks as
an adjustment; I agreed.
12. On Day 4 of the hearing, I gave judgment and reasons orally. The judgment was
as follows:
2

Case Number: 6002405/2024
12.1. the claim of failure to make reasonable adjustments (Issue 4.2.1)
succeeded;
12.2. the claims of disability-arising discrimination (Issue 3.1.1) and
harassment related to disability (Issue 5.1.1), insofar as they were
alleged against Ms Stone, were dismissed on withdrawal;
12.3. the claims of disability-arising discrimination (Issue 3.1.1) and
harassment related to disability (Issue 5.1.1), insofar as they were
alleged against Mr Patel and Ms Allen were not well-founded and were
dismissed;
12.4. the claim of direct race discrimination (Issue 2.1.1) was not well-founded
and was dismissed.
13. The Claimant's request for written reasons, sent to the Tribunal on 18 July 2025,
was not referred to me until 3 September 2025. A date was assigned in the list
for me to prepare the written reasons on 29 September 2025. Owing to an
administrative error, that date was not effective; a further date was assigned on
6 October 2025. The Tribunal apologises to the parties for the delay.
Findings of fact
14. The Respondent operates a rail passenger service under a concession
agreement with Transport for London.
15. The Claimant began his employment on 12 July 2011; his employment
transferred to the Respondent on 13 November 2016. He remains employed as
a station assistant in a customer service role, based at Leytonstone High Road
Overground station.
Background matters
16. The Claimant referred in his statement (at paragraphs 10, 12 and 17) to events
in 2017 and 2019. At the beginning of cross-examination, he confirmed that he
was not relying on those as background to his live claims. He was relying as
background on a refusal of a statutory parental leave request in 2021, and the
classification of his absence in December 2021/January 2022 as being absent
without leave. I make findings of fact in relation to those matters below.
Parental leave policy
17. The Respondent’s parental leave policy says this:
‘8.5 Notice Requirements
In order to consider your application to take Parental Leave, you must give your local
manager at least 21 days’ notice of the dates required to be taken. Whilst it is appreciated
this may not always be practical, you should give as much notice as possible.
Even though you are applying for Parental Leave, you must still complete a leave
application form, which your manager will countersign if your leave application is agreed.
If it is felt necessary, your manager may ask to see evidence that you have become a
parent or the person responsible, legally or otherwise, for a child. Evidence may be in the
form of the child’s birth certificate, papers confirming a child’s adoption or, in the case of
a disabled child, the award of Disability Living Allowance.
3

Case Number: 6002405/2024
All requests for Parental Leave will be dealt with by your Local Manager.’
The refusal of leave in 2021
18. By May 2021, the Claimant had already asked for, and been granted, annual
leave on some but not all the dates over the Christmas and New Year period
2021/2022.
19. On 26 May 2021, he made a written request to take three further days annual
leave on 22, 28 and 29 December 2021. He also asked to take five further days
as ‘unpaid leave due to childcare issues’: 23, 24, 27 December 2021 and 1 and
3 January 2022. He explained: ‘I would have taken the dates as annual leave
but these dates in the annual leave planner are already filled up.’ It is clear that
the Claimant knew from the outset that demand for time off on those days was
high because the annual leave slots had already been booked up seven months
in advance.
20. The Claimant did not use the term ‘parental leave’, but I accept that his request
would have been understood as such.
21. The Claimant is right that the policy states:
‘All requests for parental leave will be dealt with by your local manager’.
22. The policy does not say that only the local manager is permitted to have input
into the decision. That would be contrary to common sense because it would
prevent the business from overseeing the overall question of leave in any given
period, of which parental leave is merely a part. Part of dealing with a request
may involve consulting others. There is nothing in this policy to prevent
consultation with rostering or HR before the decision is taken; at busy periods it
may be essential to do so.
23. The first three days were granted but the remaining five days were refused. The
Claimant took no further action between then and mid-December.
24. On 15 December 2021, the Claimant wrote to Ms Pauline Lawler asking her to
authorise unpaid leave for the same five days which had been refused in May.
I note that this renewed request was made less than 21 days before the dates
requested, as was usually required. He explained: ‘as my circumstance still
stands, I still have childcare issues and unfortunately I will require these days
mentioned as unpaid leave’. I observe that it would also have been helpful to
explain in more detail why he was requesting them and what the specific
childcare issues were.
25. Ms Lawler replied the following day authorising him to take 23 and 24 December
2021 from his annual leave and suggested that he cancel his leave on 12
January 2022. She explained that she was unable to authorise 27 December
and 1 and 3 January, whether as paid or unpaid leave. She explained that it was
an extremely demanding time of year in terms of staffing resources; the
Respondent needed to protect business operations and not risk staffing failures.
She said that her decision was consistent with her approach to requests from
others over the festive season. If the Claimant was unable to get childcare for
the three days, she suggested he call resources to notify them of domestic
4

Case Number: 6002405/2024
emergency in the usual manner, which would then be recorded as emergency
unpaid leave.
26. I consider Ms Lawler’s response to be entirely reasonable. It also left the
Claimant with a backstop solution of requesting emergency leave if he needed
it.
27. I pause to note that I accept the Respondent’s evidence that it must be
particularly careful in its allocation of leave at peak periods such as this. It must
balance the needs of the individual against other factors. Above all, it has to
ensure that the necessary shifts are covered. I understand the business’s
preference for the shifts to be covered, where possible, by permanent
employees, rather than agency workers, because they are likely to be more
reliable; it is easier for agency workers to pull out at the last minute leaving the
Respondent in the lurch; agency workers are usually booked late in the day and
there is no guarantee, especially at peak periods, that they will be available. I
also accept that the Respondent is entitled to take into account whether granting
leave to an individual at peak times, when it is not available to other employees,
may be perceived as unfair by employees whose leave has been refused.
28. The Claimant replied on 17 December 2021. He disagreed with her outcome.
He did not want to take 23 and 24 December as annual leave because he only
had one day of leave remaining and he still wanted to take 12 January as leave;
he asked if he could take it as unpaid leave. For the first time he used the term
‘parental leave’ and suggested that a decision was inconsistent with the
Respondent’s policy.
29. The Claimant then notified the Respondent on 20 December 2020, a day on
which he was not rostered to work, that he was ‘not well to attend work until
further notice, due to work’. No further details were given.
30. He did not then consult his GP to get a fit note, even though his evidence to me
was that he was in the country until 29 December 2025.
31. Between 20 and 29 December Mr Patel repeatedly tried to contact the Claimant
but there was no reply to his phone calls or emails.
32. The Claimant’s evidence was that he was so stressed by the Respondent’s
conduct in relation to the leave issue he spoke to a medical friend who advised
him to absent himself from work, to rest, to turn off his phone and not to speak
to the Respondent.
33. If it is right that the Claimant’s friend gave him that advice (and there was no
supporting evidence: the Claimant did not even identify the friend or his status),
it was bad advice, and the Claimant was very unwise to follow it. The Claimant
knew about his obligation to keep in touch during sickness absence because he
had been warned about it in March 2020. By following his friend’s advice, the
Claimant created a situation in which, for many days, his employer did not know
where he was or when he would return. That would be unacceptable to any
employer; it would also be a matter of concern to them from the point of view of
their duty of care towards him.
34. Mr Patel eventually got through to him on 30 December and the Claimant told
him that he was in Nigeria and could not say when he would be back.
5

Case Number: 6002405/2024
35. Ms Allen was the person who first characterised the Claimant as being absent
without leave in an email on 30 December 2021. Strictly speaking, that was not
in accordance with the Respondent’s policy which provides that, if an employee
has notified the Respondent that he is sick (which the Claimant had done), it
ought to be assumed that their absence is genuine.
36. This was ten days after the Claimant reported in sick. By this point he ought to
have provided a fit note; he had not done so and did not do so until several
weeks later. With this in mind, and against the background of the fact that he
had asked for leave but it had been refused and had then taken leave and gone
abroad without telling his employer, it ought to have been obvious to him that
this might give the impression (rightly or wrongly) that that that was what he had
been planning to do all along. The fact that he then avoided contact with his
manager could only reinforce this impression. I find it completely unsurprising
that Ms Allen formed the belief that he was absent without leave. The
Respondent now accepts in these proceedings her view was ‘erroneous’; I am
satisfied, however, that it was her genuine view at the time.
37. The Claimant regards this as an example of HR targeting him in some way, as
he believed they had done before. I reject that suggestion. This was a situation
entirely of the Claimant’s own making. If he had taken emergency leave, as Ms
Lawler had suggested, the problem would never have arisen. If he had
contacted Mr Patel directly on 20 December 2024, told him what his friend had
advised, told him that he was going abroad and why and explained that he would
provide a fit note when he returned, the situation probably would not have
arisen. If he had responded to Mr Patel’s calls, the situation would probably not
have arisen. All that was required was the application of common sense on his
part.
38. I do not go into the details of how this situation then developed. Suffice it to say
that the Claimant was highly aggrieved; his trade union intervened to support
him. The Respondent’s managers blamed each other for mishandling the
situation. The term that has been used is ‘miscommunication’. I think that it a
fair summary: there was a failure of communication on all sides, including as I
have already explained on the Claimant’s part.
39. The Claimant did not raise a grievance about these events.
The refusal of parental leave in November/December 2023 (Issues 2.1.1, 3.1.1 and
5.1.1)
40. I now turn to the first of the legal claims before me, which relates to something
which happened two years after the events described above. The passage of
time is relevant, because the Claimant alleges that there was a connection
between the events.
41. On 5 October 2023, the Claimant asked for annual leave on 27 and 28
December 2023 and 1 January 2024. Rostering agreed to 27/12 and 1/1, but
not 28/12.
42. On 25 November 2023, the Claimant submitted a request for parental leave on
28-30 December 2023 and 2 January 2024. He did so more than a month in
advance of his requested leave dates.
6

Case Number: 6002405/2024
43. The Claimant says that his manager, Mr Patel, encouraged him to apply and
told him that requests were usually granted and that agency cover was
available. Again, although technically Mr Patel was entitled to approve the
request, it would have been sensible to check what the rostering position was
before doing so.
44. Mr Patel approved it on 25 November 2023. He emailed Ms Stone of rostering
asking for the Claimant to be shown as on unpaid parental leave for those dates.
Ms Stone had had no involvement in the 2021/22 events. I accept her evidence
that, when she sent her email seeking advice, she did not know the Claimant
and was not aware of the events which had happened two years earlier
45. On 27 November 2023 Ms Stone sent an email to HR, seeking advice on the
request.
‘Please can I have a prompt reply to the below request. Is this allowed? Isn’t it navigating
the system and in advance of [sic]. There is no leave available on the given dates below
and whilst I appreciate this is unpaid leave, if all staff were to submit above the quota, we
would not be able to cover the remaining shifts.’
46. Although Ms Stone denies that she was suggesting that the Claimant was
‘gaming the system’, I think it is clear that she was suggesting he was trying to
circumvent the fact that leave was in high demand over the Christmas and New
Year period by going down the route of asking for parental leave. Even if that is
what she thought, it was unprofessional to use that particular expression in an
email and she was later criticised for it by the grievance appeal manager, Ms
Whitfield. Apart from that inappropriate phrase, I see nothing inappropriate in
Ms Stone’s request for advice.
47. In an email of the same day, one of Ms Stone’s rostering clerks, Mr Ali agreed
with her:
‘I’m with you. I don’t think it should be allowed as many people have children and we
could set a dangerous precedent by allowing this during a peak period for leave.
I’m actually surprised the SDM has authorised it without speaking to anyone first. But
maybe I shouldn’t be too surprised...
Let me know what you hear back from HR. Thanks!’
48. The Claimant says that around 7 December 2023 Mr Patel told him that he was
being pressured to withdraw the parental leave. Mr Patel showed the Claimant
Ms Stone’s email to HR. That was not a sensible thing to do: it put his fellow
manager in an awkward position and it was almost bound to stoke the
Claimant’s sense of grievance, which it did.
49. Ms Allen gave her advice in an email of 27 November 2023:
‘Having looked at the request my advice is to decline the request for these dates and
suggest a more operationally feasible time to take the leave based on the following;
- unpaid parental leave must be booked in weekly blocks according to the policy. It
cannot be booked on odd days as per the request below.
- there is an operational reason as to why this does not work for the business; this is
a reasonable position to take based on the policy
7

Case Number: 6002405/2024
Hitesh I can give you a call later today to talk through the policy so that you are aware of
the rationale for my advice.
Please note that unpaid parental leave cannot be flat out declined, you can provide the
employee with dates that it may be more suitable to take the leave within 6 months of the
dates requested. So effectively you postponed the request. This is a statutory piece and
so we must adhere to these parameters.’
50. I note that Ms Allen’s advice was not to refuse the request outright but to
postpone it; that was legitimate advice, in my view.
51. On 8 December 2023, Mr Patel told the Claimant that his request had been
declined after consulting with HR; he said that the leave was being postponed
and asked for alternative dates.
52. The Claimant objected to the decision in strong terms and, on 14 December, Mr
Patel informed him that his leave would be granted as ordinary unpaid leave (as
opposed to parental leave). Thus, the practical detriment that the Claimant
suffered was limited. Nonetheless he put in a grievance on 9 January 2024
which progressed through three stages. I do not deal with it in detail as there no
claims of discrimination relating to the handling of the grievance.
53. There was further disagreement between the managers (Mr Patel, Ms Stone
and Ms Allen) as to whose fault this was. I am not going to go into detail about
that, other than to say that Ms Whitfield concluded in her outcome letter at the
grievance appeal stage on 8 July 2024 - in which she acknowledged that the
process had been poorly handled - that Mr Patel’s original decision should have
stood, and that the tone of Ms Stone’s email was inappropriate and could be
perceived by the Claimant as offensive.
54. Around the same time as the Claimant’s request was declined, Mr
Fazzlurrahman (of Asian origin) had his request for parental leave agreed for
12-19 January 2024. The Claimant relies on him as an actual comparator and
says he was treated less favourably than him because of race.
Application of the Respondent’s MFA policy (Issue 4.2.1)
55. Between 21 January and 21 February 2024, the Claimant had a period of
sickness absence, recorded as ‘work-related stress’, supported by a medical
certificate. On his return Mr Patel put him on a Stage 1 Managing for Attendance
(MFA) procedure. The letter informing him of this stated:
56. The Claimant was put on Stage 1 [304]:
‘Thank you for meeting with me on 22nd February 2024 to complete your return to work.
During the meeting we also discussed Stage 1 of the Managing for Attendance (MFA).
Your recent absence has meant that you have triggered the informal stage of ARL’s MFA
procedure. Those triggers are 5 or more days in a thirteen week period.
The MFA procedure is designed to sustain and improve your attendance whilst
supporting your welfare at work.
We discussed your absence from 21st January 2024 to 21st February 2024. The reason
for this absence was due to work related stress.
There were no underlying medical or other reasons for your absence.
There is no support that you felt ARL could provide to help you at this time.
8

Case Number: 6002405/2024
You are now being monitored under MFA Stage I. I will monitor your attendance over a
52 week monitoring period from 22nd February 2024 to 21st February 2025 over which
time we expect that improvement will be maintained.
The same trigger points apply to all stages of the procedure. They are the following:
- 2 absences or five days in a thirteen week rolling period, or
- 5 absences or ten days absence in a fixed fifty-two-week period
If your attendance improves and is maintained at a satisfactory level, you will be removed
from the MFA procedure at the end of this monitoring period. However, if at any time
during this period, if attendance falls below an acceptable level and triggers the levels
set out above, you will proceed to MFA Stage II.
Stage I MFA is an informal stage in the procedure and there is ample opportunity to
improve your attendance to a satisfactory level. However it is important that you attend
work on time as failure may lead us having no alternative but treat employment as serious
risk as part of later stages of the MFA procedure.’
The Respondent’s knowledge of disability
57. EJ Volkmer concluded that the Claimant was a disabled person in February
2024, indeed that he was already a disabled person by December 2023. I turn
now to the question of whether the Respondent actually knew, or ought
reasonably to have known, that the Claimant had a disability at the material
time.
58. At the point when Mr Patel put the Claimant on MFA stage 1, he had known
since the 2021/2022 incident that the Claimant had suffered from mental health
problems, because the Claimant had told him so. Moreover, the Claimant told
me (and Mr Patel was not present to contradict him) that he gave Mr Patel a
short letter from a Nigerian practitioner in January 2022, which expressly
referred to adjustment disorders, depression and anxiety.
59. The Claimant had had two previous referrals to OH, neither of which advised
that the Claimant was probably disabled.
60. However, in June 2024, after the time I am considering, and as a result of a self-
referral by the Claimant, there was a further OH report which concluded:
‘Summary of fitness to work/recommendations: Mr Obumneme is fit for his role. It
should be appreciated, that his mental health is severely influenced, by his disputes with
management. Long-term mental health issues can be harmful to his health and should
be beneficial if these disputes can be resolved timely.
Longer-term medical capability: It is my medical opinion that he would most probably
be able to render reliable service in the future.
Equality Act 2010: It is my medical opinion that this Act is likely to apply due to his
prolonged period of mental health issues and the fact that it does have an influence on
his day-to-day living. However, this is a legal matter, which would be decided by
appropriate legal processes if contested.’
61. At the point when Mr Patel decided to put the Claimant on stage 1, the Claimant
had just returned from a four-week period of absence which was categorised as
being ‘stress at work’. This was not his first substantial period of absence for
stress at work. In my judgment, a reasonable employer would have referred the
9

Case Number: 6002405/2024
Claimant to OH at that point. It was mandatory under the Respondent’s own
policy:
‘Disability-related absences
Where an employee gives as a reason for absence an underlying health issue that could
amount to a disability under the Equality Act 2010, the manager must refer the employee
to OH. This includes where the employee states they are suffering from stress.
Managers should remember that the organisation is under a duty to make reasonable
adjustments for disabled employees. Where the absence is wholly or partly for a disability
related reason, the trigger points referred to in this policy may need to be modified to take
proper account of the employee’s disability and other adjustments to the procedures set
out in this policy may need to be made. If in doubt the manager should contact OH via
HR for further guidance.’
62. I find, on the balance probabilities, that if Mr Patel had referred to the Claimant
to OH before making his decision in February 2024, OH would probably have
advised that the Claimant was a disabled person within the meaning of the
Equality Act. There was ample evidence of recurrent and significant mental
health difficulties, leading to absences. If OH had asked him about medication
(which it ought reasonably to have done), the Claimant would have told them
that he had been taking anti-depressants, on and off, since 2014. Having regard
to the doctrine of deduced effects, and taken together with Mr Patel’s own
knowledge of the Claimant’s mental health difficulties, I am satisfied that he (and
the Respondent generally) ought reasonably to have known that the Claimant
was disabled at that point.
The law
Knowledge of disability
63. Knowledge of disability is relevant to claims under ss.15 and 20 EqA. The
burden is on the Respondent to show that it did not know that the Claimant was
disabled (actual knowledge), or that it ought not reasonably to have known that
he was disabled (constructive knowledge).
64. The relevant case law was summarised by HHJ Eady QC (as she then was) in
A Ltd v Z [2020] ICR 199 EAT at [23].
‘23. In determining whether the employer had requisite knowledge for section
15(2) purposes, the following principles are uncontroversial between the parties in
this appeal:
(1) There need only be actual or constructive knowledge as to the disability itself,
not the causal link between the disability and its consequent effects which led to
the unfavourable treatment: see York City Council v Grosset [2018] ICR 1492, para
39.
(2) The Respondent need not have constructive knowledge of the complainant's
diagnosis to satisfy the requirements of section 15(2); it is, however, for the
employer to show that it was unreasonable for it to be expected to know that a
person (a) suffered an impediment to his physical or mental health, or (b) that that
impairment had a substantial and (c) long-term effect: see Donelien v Liberata UK
Ltd (unreported) 16 December 2014, para 5, per Langstaff J (President), and also
see Pnaiser v NHS England [2016] IRLR 170, para 69, per Simler J.
(3) The question of reasonableness is one of fact and evaluation: see Donelien v
Liberata UK Ltd [2018] IRLR 535, para 27; none the less, such assessments must
10

Case Number: 6002405/2024
be adequately and coherently reasoned and must take into account all relevant
factors and not take into account those that are irrelevant.
(4) When assessing the question of constructive knowledge, an employee's
representations as to the cause of absence or disability-related symptoms can be
of importance: (i) because, in asking whether the employee has suffered
substantial adverse effect, a reaction to life events may fall short of the definition
of disability for Equality Act purposes (see Herry v Dudley Metropolitan Borough
Council [2017] ICR 610, per Judge David Richardson, citing J v DLA Piper UK llp
[2010] ICR 1052 ), and (ii) because, without knowing the likely cause of a given
impairment, “it becomes much more difficult to know whether it may well last for
more than 12 months, if it has not [already] done so”, per Langstaff J in Donelien
16 December 2014, para 31.
(5) The approach adopted to answering the question thus posed by section 15(2)
is to be informed by the code, which (relevantly) provides as follows:
5.14 It is not enough for the employer to show that they did not know that the
disabled person had the disability. They must also show that they could not
reasonably have been expected to know about it. Employers should consider
whether a worker has a disability even where one has not been formally
disclosed, as, for example, not all workers who meet the definition of disability
may think of themselves as a ‘disabled person’.
5.15 An employer must do all they can reasonably be expected to do to find
out if a worker has a disability. What is reasonable will depend on the
circumstances. This is an objective assessment. When making inquiries about
disability, employers should consider issues of dignity and privacy and ensure
that personal information is dealt with confidentially.
(6) It is not incumbent upon an employer to make every inquiry where there is little
or no basis for doing so: Ridout v TC Group [1998] IRLR 628; Secretary of State for
Work and Pensions v Alam [2010] ICR 665 .
(7) Reasonableness, for the purposes of section 15(2) , must entail a balance
between the strictures of making inquiries, the likelihood of such inquiries yielding
results and the dignity and privacy of the employee, as recognised by the code.
65. The Statutory Code of Practice deals with the question of knowledge in the
context of a claim under Section 15 of the Equality Act 2010 in the following
paragraphs:
5.14 It is not enough for the employer to show that they did not know that the
disabled person had the disability. They must also show that they could not
reasonably have been expected to know about it. Employers should consider
whether a worker has a disability even where one has not been formally disclosed,
as, for example, not all workers who meet the definition of disability may think of
themselves as a ‘disabled person’.
5.15 An employer must do all they can reasonably be expected to do to find out if
a worker has a disability. What is reasonable will depend on the circumstances.
This is an objective assessment. When making enquiries about disability,
employers should consider issues of dignity and privacy and ensure that personal
information is dealt with confidentially.
66. There is a further requirement in a reasonable adjustments claim: that the
employer knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the disability was likely
to (‘could well’) put the Claimant at a substantial (more than minor or trivial)
disadvantage in comparison with non-disabled persons.
11

Case Number: 6002405/2024
Failure to make reasonable adjustments: s.20-21 EqA
67. S.20 EqA provides as relevant:
(1) Where this Act imposes a duty to make reasonable adjustments on a person,
this section, sections 21 and 22 and the applicable Schedule apply; and for those
purposes, a person on whom the duty is imposed is referred to as A.
(2) The duty comprises the following three requirements.
(3) The first requirement is a requirement, where a provision, criterion or practice
of A’s puts a disabled person at a substantial disadvantage in relation to a relevant
matter in comparison with persons who are not disabled, to take such steps as it
is reasonable to have to take to avoid the disadvantage.
[…]
68. S.21 EqA provides as relevant:
(1) A failure to comply with the first, second or third requirement is a failure to
comply with a duty to make reasonable adjustments.
(2) A discriminates against a disabled person if A fails to comply with that duty in
relation to that person.
…
69. The burden is on the Claimant to show the PCP, to demonstrate substantial
disadvantage, and to make out a prima facie case that there is some apparently
reasonable adjustment which could have been made (and that, on the face of
it, there has been a breach of the duty): Project Management Institute v Latif
[2007] IRLR 579 at [45] and [54]. If the PCP contended for was not actually
applied, the claim falls at the first fence: Brangwyn v South Warwickshire NHS
Foundation Trust [2018] EWCA Civ 2235 at [40].
70. In Griffiths v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2016] ICR 76, a case
concerning the application of an absence management policy, the Court of
Appeal held (at [47]):
‘In my judgment, the appropriate formulation of the relevant PCP in a case of this
kind was in essence how the employment tribunal framed it in this case: the
employee must maintain a certain level of attendance at work in order not to be
subject to the risk of disciplinary sanctions. That is the provision breach of which
may end in warnings and ultimately dismissal. Once the relevant PCP is formulated
in that way, in my judgment it is clear that the minority member was right to say
that a disabled employee whose disability increases the likelihood of absence from
work on ill-health grounds is disadvantaged in more than a minor or trivial way.
Whilst it is no doubt true that both disabled and able bodied alike will, to a greater
or lesser extent, suffer stress and anxiety if they are ill in circumstances which
may lead to disciplinary sanctions, the risk of this occurring is obviously greater
for that group of disabled workers whose disability results in more frequent, and
perhaps longer, absences. They will find it more difficult to comply with the
requirement relating to absenteeism and therefore will be disadvantaged by it.’
71. The reasonableness of an adjustment falls to be assessed objectively by the
Tribunal: Morse v Wiltshire County Council [1998] IRLR 352.
Discrimination arising from disability: s.15 EqA
72. S.15 EqA provides as follows:
12

Case Number: 6002405/2024
(1) A person (A) discriminates against a disabled person (B) if—
(a) A treats B unfavourably because of something arising in consequence of
B's disability, and
(b) A cannot show that the treatment is a proportionate means of achieving a
legitimate aim.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if A shows that A did not know, and could not
reasonably have been expected to know, that B had the disability.
73. The correct approach to a claim of this sort was considered by the Court of
Appeal in City of York Council v Grosset [2018] IRLR 746 per Sales LJ (at para
36 onwards):
‘36. On its proper construction, section 15(1)(a) requires an investigation of two
distinct causative issues: (i) did A treat B unfavourably because of an (identified)
"something"? and (ii) did that "something" arise in consequence of B's disability.
37. The first issue involves an examination of A's state of mind, to establish
whether the unfavourable treatment which is in issue occurred by reason of A's
attitude to the relevant "something" ...
38. The second issue is an objective matter, whether there is a causal link between
B's disability and the relevant "something" ….’
74. The ‘something’ that causes the unfavourable treatment need not be the main
or sole reason but must have at least a significant influence on the unfavourable
treatment and so amount to an effective reason for or cause of it (Pnaiser v NHS
England [2016] IRLR 170 per Simler J at [31]). It is not enough if the disability
reason is merely the background to the treatment; it is not a ‘but for’ test
(Leicester City Council v Gibbin [2024] EAT 138).
75. It is then necessary to look to the employer’s defence of justification. S.15(1)(b)
EqA provides that the unfavourable treatment may be justified, if it is a
proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. To be proportionate, the
conduct in question must be both an appropriate means of achieving a
legitimate aim and a reasonably necessary means of doing so (Allonby v
Accrington & Rossendale College & Others [2001] ICR 1189 CA).
Direct race discrimination
76. S.13(1) EqA provides:
A person (A) discriminates against another (B) if, because of a protected
characteristic, A treats B less favourably than A treats or would treat others.
77. The question whether the alleged discriminator acted ‘because of’ a protected
characteristic is a question as to their reasons for acting as they did; the test is
subjective (Nagarajan v London Regional Transport [1999] ICR 877, per Lord
Nicholls at 884).
78. It is sufficient that the protected characteristic had a ‘significant influence’ on the
decision to act in the manner complained of; it need not be the sole ground for
the decision (Nagarajan at 886).
79. The conventional approach to considering whether there has been direct
discrimination is a two-stage approach: considering first whether there has been
less favourable treatment by reference to a real or hypothetical comparator; and
secondly going on to consider whether that treatment is because of the
13

Case Number: 6002405/2024
protected characteristic, here race/religion. More recently, the appellate courts
have encouraged Tribunals to address both stages by considering a single
question: the ‘reason why’ the employer did the act or acts alleged to be
discriminatory. Was it on the prohibited ground or was it for some other reason?
This approach does not require the construction of a hypothetical comparator:
see, for example, the comments of Underhill J in Martin v Devonshires Solicitors
[2011] ICR 352 at [30].
Harassment related to disability
80. Harassment related to race is defined by s.26 EqA, which provides, so far as
relevant:
(1) A person (A) harasses another (B) if-
(a) A engages in unwanted conduct related to a relevant protected
characteristic, and
(b) the conduct has the purpose or effect of—
(i) violating B's dignity, or
(ii) creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive
environment for B.
…
(4) In deciding whether conduct has the effect referred to in subsection (1)(b), each
of the following must be taken into account—
(a) the perception of B;
(b) the other circumstances of the case;
(c) whether it is reasonable for the conduct to have that effect.
(5) The relevant protected characteristics are—
…
race
…
81. The Court of Appeal in Pemberton v Inwood [2018] ICR 1291 gave guidance on
the correct approach to these provisions (per Underhill LJ at [88]):
‘In order to decide whether any conduct falling within sub-paragraph (1)(a) has
either of the proscribed effects under sub-paragraph (1)(b), a tribunal must
consider both (by reason of sub-section (4)(a)) whether the putative victim
perceives themselves to have suffered the effect in question (the subjective
question) and (by reason of sub-section (4)(c)) whether it was reasonable for the
conduct to be regarded as having that effect (the objective question). It must also,
of course, take into account all the other circumstances – sub-section (4)(b). The
relevance of the subjective question is that if the claimant does not perceive their
dignity to have been violated, or an adverse environment created, then the conduct
should not be found to have had that effect. The relevance of the objective question
is that if it was not reasonable for the conduct to be regarded as violating the
claimant's dignity or creating an adverse environment for him or her, then it should
not be found to have done so.’
82. The test for whether conduct achieved the requisite degree of seriousness to
amount to harassment was considered (in the context of the formulation in s.3A
Race Relations Act 1976) by the EAT in Richmond Pharmacology v Dhaliwal
[2009] IRLR 336 per Underhill P. at [22]:
‘We accept that not every racially slanted adverse comment or conduct may
constitute the violation of a person's dignity. Dignity is not necessarily violated by
things said or done which are trivial or transitory, particularly if it should have been
14

Case Number: 6002405/2024
clear that any offence was unintended. While it is very important that employers,
and Tribunals, are sensitive to the hurt that can be caused by racially offensive
comments or conduct (or indeed comments or conduct on other grounds covered
by the cognate legislation to which we have referred), it is also important not to
encourage a culture of hypersensitivity or the imposition of legal liability in respect
of every unfortunate phrase.’
83. Elias LJ in Land Registry v Grant [2011] ICR 1390 at [47] held that sufficient
seriousness should be accorded to the terms ‘violation of dignity’ and
‘intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment’.
‘Tribunals must not cheapen the significance of these words. They are an
important control to prevent trivial acts causing minor upsets being caught by the
concept of harassment.’
84. The EAT in Betsi Cadwaladr University Health Board v Hughes [2014]
UKEAT/0179/13/JOJ at [12], referring to Elias LJ’s observations in Grant,
stated:
‘We wholeheartedly agree. The word “violating” is a strong word. Offending
against dignity, hurting it, is insufficient. “Violating” may be a word the strength of
which is sometimes overlooked. The same might be said of the words
“intimidating” etc. All look for effects which are serious and marked, and not those
which are, though real, truly of lesser consequence.’
85. Guidance as to the construction of the wording ‘related to a relevant protected
characteristic’ was given by the Court of Appeal in UNITE the Union v Nailard
[2018] IRLR 730. It imports a broader test than that which applies in a claim of
direct discrimination. It was intended to ensure that the definition covered cases
where the acts complained of were associated with the prescribed factor as well
as those where they were caused by it. However, there are limits. The Tribunal
in that case had allowed that a failure to address a sexual harassment
complaint, made against elected officials of the union, could itself amount to
harassment related to sex 'because of the background of harassment related to
sex'. That, the Court of Appeal held, went too far. The Tribunal had not made
any findings as to whether the claimant’s sex formed part of the motivation of
the alleged discriminator.
The burden of proof in discrimination cases
86. The burden of proof provisions are contained in s.136 EqA:
(1) This section applies to any proceedings relating to a contravention of this Act.
(2) If there are facts from which the court could decide, in the absence of any other
explanation, that a person (A) contravened the provision concerned, the court
must hold that the contravention occurred.
(3) But subsection (2) does not apply if A shows that A did not contravene the
provision.
87. The operation of the burden of proof provisions was summarised by Underhill
LJ in Base Childrenswear Ltd v Otshudi [2020] IRLR 118 at [18]:
‘It is unnecessary that I reproduce here the entirety of the guidance given by
Mummery LJ in Madarassy.1 He explained the two stages of the process required
by the statute as follows:
1 Madarassy v Nomura International plc [2007] ICR 867, CA
15

Case Number: 6002405/2024
(1) At the first stage the Claimant must prove “a prima facie case”. That does
not, as he says at para. 56 of his judgment (p. 878H), mean simply proving
“facts from which the Tribunal could conclude that the Respondent 'could
have' committed an unlawful act of discrimination”. As he continued (pp.
878-9):
“56. … The bare facts of a difference in status and a difference in treatment
only indicate a possibility of discrimination. They are not, without more,
sufficient material from which a Tribunal 'could conclude' that, on the
balance of probabilities, the Respondent had committed an unlawful act of
discrimination.
57. 'Could conclude' in section 63A(2) [of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975]
must mean that 'a reasonable Tribunal could properly conclude' from all
the evidence before it. …”
(2) If the Claimant proves a prima facie case the burden shifts to the
Respondent to prove that he has not committed an act of unlawful
discrimination – para. 58 (p. 879D). As Mummery LJ continues:
“He may prove this by an adequate non-discriminatory explanation of the
treatment of the complainant. If he does not, the Tribunal must uphold the
discrimination claim.”
He goes on to explain that it is legitimate to take into account at the first
stage all evidence which is potentially relevant to the complaint of
discrimination, save only the absence of an adequate explanation.’
88. The burden of proof provisions should not be applied by the Tribunal in an overly
mechanistic manner: see Khan v The Home Office [2008] EWCA Civ 578 per
Maurice Kay LJ at [12]. The approach laid down by s.136 EqA will require careful
attention where there is room for doubt as to the facts necessary to establish
discrimination, but where the Tribunal is able to make positive findings on the
evidence one way or another, the provisions of s.136 will be of little assistance:
see Martin v Devonshires Solicitors [2011] ICR 352 at [39], approved by the
Supreme Court in Hewage v Grampian Health Board [2012] ICR 1054 at [32].
Conclusions
Issue 2.1.1 (direct race discrimination): On or around 7 December 2023 Mr Patel, Mr
Stone and Ms Allen refused the claimant’s application for parental leave, even though
Mr Patel had previously granted it on 27 November 2023. The Claimant relies on Mr
Mohammed Fazlurrahman as an actual comparator.
Issue 3.1.1 (disability-arising discrimination): as above; the ‘something arising’ is the
Claimant’s absence for health reasons in 2021/2022; the legitimate aims are:
1. the need to maintain public transport services over the Christmas period and to
ensure that there are adequate levels of staff in place to provide the assistance
services delivered by Station Assistants such as the Claimant to the customers using
the Respondent’s services during those periods;
2. the need to ensure sufficient cover was in place to meet the Respondent’s
commitments to Transport for London over the 2023 Christmas period and in future
Christmas periods;
3. the need to maintain industrial relations by ensuring that those accessing benefits
like parental leave do so in accordance with the eligibility criteria agreed with the
Respondent’s recognised trade unions.
4. the Respondent pursuance of its own statutory right to postpone the leave in
circumstances where it considers that the operation of its business would be unduly
16

Case Number: 6002405/2024
disrupted if the employee took leave during the period identified in his notice
(paragraph 6 (b) of the MPL Regulations).
Issue 5.1.1 (harassment related to disability): as above.
89. The Claimant withdrew his allegation that Ms Stone refused his leave request
as an act of disability discrimination (Issues 3.1.1 and 5.1.1). Those claims
against her are dismissed.
90. As for the claim of direct race discrimination against her (Issue 2.1.1), the
Claimant compares his treatment with that of Mr Fazzlurrahman, who asked for
leave in a week-long block in the middle of January. That was not a period of
high demand for leave. The Claimant was asking for individual days during a
peak period of leave requests. In my judgment the circumstances were so
completely different that Mr Fazzlurrahman is not only not a valid actual
comparator, he is of no value as an evidential comparator.
91. I have concluded that the sole reason why Ms Stone wrote her email was
because she wanted advice from HR about how to handle a request which
caused her concern; and the sole reason why she refused the request was
because that was what she was advised to do by Ms Allen. I am satisfied that
Ms Stone would have acted in the same way if an employee of a different race
from the Claimant had asked for leave during a peak period; her actions had
nothing whatsoever to do with his race. The claim of direct race discrimination
against her is not well-founded and is dismissed.
92. As for Mr Patel, all he did was to communicate to the Claimant a decision with
which he did not agree; left to himself, the leave would have been granted. I am
satisfied that the sole reason why he rejected the Claimant’s request was
because he was advised to do so by Ms Stone. It had nothing whatsoever to do
with the Claimant’s race, his disability or his absence over the Christmas period
in 2021/22. The claims of race and disability discrimination against him in
relation to these events are, in my view, misconceived and they are dismissed.
93. Turning to Ms Allen, I accept her evidence that she gave her advice based on
the information which she had been given in the email thread. I also accept that
the reason why she advised that the request should be rejected were the
reasons she gave in her email. Her advice may not have been correct, but that
does not mean that it was discriminatory.
94. As for the claim of disability-arising discrimination, I accept her evidence that
she was not influenced by the events of 2021/2022. They happened two years
earlier; they were resolved quickly without the Claimant having to make a
complaint or grievance of any sort; I think it improbable that, even if Ms Allen
remembered them, she would have been adversely influenced by them. She is
an experienced HR professional, dealing with multiple employee relations
issues every day, some of which were likely to be far more complex and
acrimonious than the incident in 2021/2022. I accept her evidence that she dealt
with this incident in 2023/2024 on its own facts.
95. Because I have concluded that the Claimant’s absence in 2021/2022 played no
part in Ms Allen’s thinking, her actions could not be because of something in
consequence of the Claimant’s disability and that claim must fail.
17

Case Number: 6002405/2024
96. As for the harassment claim, there is no evidence that her advice was related
to disability (including but not limited to the Claimant’s absence in 2021/2022)
and the claim fails for that reason. Alternatively, in order for the claim of
harassment to succeed, I must be satisfied that it was either Ms Allen’s purpose
to violate the Claimant’s dignity, or to create an intimidating, hostile, degrading,
humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant, or that it was reasonable
for her advice to have that effect. That is a very high hurdle It was not put to her
that her purpose was to create the proscribed environment, nor is there any
evidence that it was. Nor am I satisfied her advice had the effect of violating the
Claimant’s dignity or creating the proscribed environment. I accept that the
Claimant was upset by the decision but mere upset is not enough to cross the
threshold into harassment. For these reasons, the claim of harassment related
to disability fails and is dismissed.
97. As for the race discrimination claim, Ms Allen describes herself as being of
mixed black heritage. There is not a scrap of evidence that the Claimant’s race
had any influence whatsoever on her advice. Although the Claimant was treated
less favourably than M Fazzlurrahman who is Asian, I have already concluded
that he does not assist me even as an evidential comparator. There is nothing
from I could reasonably conclude that the Claimant’s race was a factor in Ms
Allen’s advice to postpone the Claimant’s parental leave request. The claim of
direct race discrimination against her is dismissed.
Issue 4.2.1 (failure to make reasonable adjustments): the PCP relied on is ‘The
Respondent’s MFA policy including the trigger point for Stage [1]’; the disadvantage is
that ‘due to his depression and anxiety he was more likely to be absent from work so at
greater risk of action being taken and potentially being dismissed’; the adjustment
contended for is ‘adjusting the trigger points’.
98. I turned out to the Claimant’s final claim which is a claim of failure to make
reasonable adjustments. I have already found as a fact that the Respondent
had constructive knowledge of the Claimant’s disability at the material time (para
63).
99. The PCP relied on by the Claimant is the MFA policy including the trigger point
for Stage I. Effectively, it is the requirement that the employee had to maintain
a certain level of attendance at work in order not to hit the triggers and to
progress through the MFA stages (see Griffiths above).
100. The next question is whether applying the triggers to the Claimant under the
MFA policy put the Claimant at a more than minor or trivial disadvantage by
comparison with people without his disability.
101. The disadvantage relied on by the Claimant is that, owing to his disability, he
was more likely to be absent from work, and so at greater risk of action being
taken and potentially being dismissed. In closing submissions, the Claimant
made a further point about the disadvantage he experienced - that he avoided
taking sickness absence which he needed for fear of triggering action - which at
the time I suggested to him was not part of his case. However, during my
deliberations I confirmed that in fact it was specifically referred to in his witness
statement at paragraph 66 where he wrote:
‘In addition to the risk of sanctions/dismissal, which was that, as a result of being put on
stage I, I have experienced emotional distress… And I have avoided further sick leave
18

Case Number: 6002405/2024
despite a decline in my mental health, for fear the Respondent is seeking a pretext to
dismiss me.’
102. That evidence was not challenged in cross-examination. In any event it is merely
a facet of the pleaded disadvantage. If a person is at risk of sanctions under an
absence management policy, one way which they may respond is to avoid
absence, even when it is needed.
103. I am satisfied that the likelihood of absence from work is increased if an
employee has a disability which consists of significant long-term mental health
difficulties; consequently, that person is more likely to hit the trigger points under
the MFA policy, risking sanctions, and more likely to be anxious about taking
sickness absence than a person without that disability; in my judgment that is a
more than minor or trivial disadvantage.
104. I must then consider whether the Respondent had actual or constructive
knowledge of the disadvantage. I am satisfied that it did: it appears to me to be
self-evident that a person with a long-term mental health disability of this kind is
likely to have a higher level of absence than a person without that disability.
105. The next question is whether it was reasonable for the Respondent to have to
make an adjustment to the trigger point at which the Claimant was put on stage
I and/or the trigger points within stage I.
106. It was Mr Patel who took the decision to put the Claimant onto stage I without
adjusting the trigger points. His explanation in his witness statement for doing
so was brief and unsatisfactory. He explained that the reason he did so was
because, after a previous period of sickness absence for work-related stress in
2022, he had exercised his discretion not to put the Claimant on stage I, noting
‘usually this would trigger, however this is work-related’.
107. When the Claimant returned from a period of 32 days sickness absence which
was marked as being for work-related stress in 2024, Mr Patel decided to put
the Claimant on stage I ‘as I felt I had already used my discretion not to place
him on a stage in 2022, so this would be fully justified’.
108. A 32-day absence is very substantial. However, in my judgment Mr Patel should
have considered this later absence in its own right. The fact that he had been
(in his view) generous on a previous occasion, two years earlier, was not a good
reason for being inflexible on this occasion. He should have referred the
Claimant to OH and he should have carefully considered whether any
adjustments were needed in the light of the situation as it stood in 2024.
109. In answer to question from me, Ms Allen confirmed that, in appropriate
circumstances, it is the Respondent’s practice to adjust the trigger points under
its MFA policy. There was no evidence before me that the specific thresholds in
the policy were of any particular significance to the Respondent, or that an
adjustment to them could not be accommodated in this case by the Respondent
for business reasons. I consider that an adjustment of the targets set out in the
letter sent to the Claimant to three absences or eight days in a thirteen-week
rolling period, or seven absences or fifteen days in a fixed fifty-two-week period
could probably have been accommodated. I considered there was a reasonable
prospect that, if those adjustments to the triggers had been made, the Claimant
would have felt supported and consequently less anxious and would probably
19

Case Number: 6002405/2024
have maintained an appropriate level of attendance. Of course, if his attendance
then fell below the adjusted targets, the Respondent would probably have
considered whether it would be appropriate to progress him to the next stage,
most likely with the assistance of further OH advice.
110. I have concluded that it was reasonable for the Respondent to have to adjust
the trigger points in this way in February 2024; it did not do so. Accordingly, this
claim of failure to make reasonable adjustments succeeds.
Next steps
111. The Claimant is entitled to compensation for this single successful claim of
discrimination, consisting of a breach of the duty to make reasonable
adjustments.
112. I observed at the conclusion of the hearing that it appears to me that there are
no financial losses flowing from this act; it is likely that the compensation will
consist of an award for injury to feelings, possibly with an element of personal
injury, although that would be subject to the need for medical evidence. There
would also be interest. I expressed a preliminary view, to assist the parties in
any discussions they may have, that the Claimant’s schedule of loss as it stood,
was very high indeed. I observed that, in reviewing it, he should take into
account that he did not succeed in the majority of his claims.
113. I also observed that the Respondent’s MFA policy was one of the most
benevolent policies I have come across, with its focus firmly on providing
support to employees with health difficulties. I was fortified in my view by the
fact that the Respondent has only dismissed four people in the last 10 years for
ill-health capability. That is a remarkably low figure.
114. I strongly encouraged the parties to see if they could resolve the question of
compensation by agreement without the need for a further contested hearing.
That is advice I always give at the end of a successful liability hearing. I
considered it all the more appropriate in circumstances where the employment
is continuing. There was an opportunity for both the Claimant and the
Respondent to draw a line under the events of the past few years and to make
a fresh start. As part of an agreed settlement, the parties could incorporate non-
financial elements, such as the detailed terms of an agreed referral to OH
(possibly with input from the Claimant’s GP so that OH is aware of the
Claiamnt’s medical history), which might lead to greater clarity as to the
adjustments which ought to be put in place, having regard both to the Claimant
needs going forward and to the business needs of the Respondent, which must
also be taken into account. They might also wish to agree to some form of
internal mediation to try and re-establish relationships between individuals.
Measures such as these might help to reset the relationship between the
Claimant and the Respondent.
115. I also urged the Claimant to remember that, in taking any decision, his employer
will have other factors it needs to take into account, apart for his own wishes
and needs. They are unlikely to agree to every request he makes. I encouraged
him to try and see things from the perspective of others and not to fall into the
mindset of assuming that every decision his employer takes, which is not to his
liking, is designed to target him, or is part of a conspiracy against him. I also
20

Case Number: 6002405/2024
encouraged him to reflect carefully before making serious allegations against
individual colleagues which do not have a sure foundation.
116. I expressed a concern that, if both sides do not reflect carefully on their
respective positions at this stage, this pattern of conflict, some of which appears
to me to be founded on mutual misunderstanding, may continue and escalate,
which would be unfortunate.
Employment Judge Massarella
Date: 6 October 2025
21