Case Number: 6022319/2025
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS
Claimant: Mr C Hemingway
Respondent: Cash Converters Yorkshire Limited
On: 3 October 2025
Before: Employment Judge McAvoy Newns
Heard at: Leeds Employment Tribunal (via CVP)
Appearances:
For the Claimant: In person
For the Respondent: Mr Menon, Counsel
RESERVED JUDGMENT
1. The Claimant was not unfairly dismissed.
2. His unfair dismissal claim is not well founded and is dismissed.
WRITTEN REASONS
Form of hearing
1. This was a remote hearing which was not objected to by the parties.
Issues in the claim
2. The Claimant’s claim was limited to a claim for unfair dismissal. The Claimant
confirmed at the outset that he was not pursuing a claim for wrongful
dismissal/breach of contract regarding his notice pay.
3. It was agreed that the issues were as follows:
1

Case Number: 6022319/2025
a. It was accepted between the parties that the Claimant sold a personal
item (namely an Airbrush) to the store in which he worked without
obtaining authorisation from the Regional Manager, contrary to the
“Employee Usage” policy, causing financial loss to the Respondent. It
was accepted that this was the reason for the Claimant’s dismissal.
b. Did the Respondent act in all the circumstances reasonably in treating
its reason as sufficient reason to dismiss the Claimant? In this regard:
i. the Claimant contended that he had been treated inconsistently
to several allegedly comparable employees;
ii. the Claimant asserted he was not provided with evidence in
advance of the hearing, key parts of statements were omitted
and Tony Ward displayed bias, rendering the process unfair; and
iii. the Claimant said the dismissal decision was too harsh,
particularly given he was left in post for 48 hours after the sale
was discovered, and did not take into consideration his length of
service or his father’s then recent stroke.
Preliminary issue – specific disclosure
4. Prior to today’s hearing, the Claimant had made several specific disclosure
requests largely relating to documents concerning the alleged comparators that
he sought to rely upon. The Respondent’s representative did not agree to
provide them until their counsel became involved, soon before the hearing. This
resulted in these documents being provided to the Claimant very late. The
Claimant had no objection to me considering them, and did not wish for the
hearing to be postponed, but wanted me to note the Respondent’s failures in
this regard. He told me that he had had sufficient time to consider these
documents as part of his preparations and would not be prejudiced if I decided
to continue with the hearing. The hearing, therefore, proceeded.
Application for anonymisation
5. On 6 October 2025, therefore after the hearing had taken place, the Respondent
applied for an anonymity order pursuant to Rule 49(3)(b) of the Tribunal’s Rules
of Procedure 2024. The request was for the names of the alleged comparators
to be abbreviated. Rule 49 states that the Tribunal may, on its own initiative,
make such an order if it is necessary in the interests of justice or in order to
protect the Convention rights of any person. Prior to receiving the Respondent’s
application, I had already decided to make such an order which is why I have
not sought comments from the Claimant on this application before considering
it. Plainly it would be in the interests of justice and necessary to protect the
Article 8 ECHR rights of these individuals. They had not participated in this
hearing and may not have even been aware that their names and personal
information about them was being discussed during these proceedings. It would
therefore be grossly contrary to the interests of justice and their Article 8 ECHR
2

Case Number: 6022319/2025
rights for them to be identifiable, enabling their alleged misconduct, and
decisions about their employment, to be reported on in the media.
Evidence
6. The Claimant served a witness statement and was cross examined on that
statement. For the Respondent, witness statements for Paul Stead (Regional
Manager and Dismissing Officer), Tony Ward (Head of Operations and Appeal
Officer) and Lynne McGarvey (HR Manager (who had two statements, the latter
largely to address the comparators)) were served. Each were cross examined.
No other witnesses gave evidence.
7. I also had sight of a bundle of documents comprising 174 pages (excluding the
witness statements) and a handful of documents provided at the outset of the
hearing.
Findings of fact
8. Having considered the evidence, both oral and documentary, I make the
following findings of fact on the balance of probabilities.
Background
9. The Claimant commenced employment with the Respondent in January 2015.
He was initially employed as a General Assistant. He was promoted to Assistant
Store Manager in December 2016. He was later promoted to Store Manager
and worked at the Respondent’s Halifax store until his dismissal on 10 April
2025.
10. The Respondent’s disciplinary procedure states that any breach of the
Respondent’s rules regarding “Employee Usage” is an offence of gross
misconduct and “that an employee who commits them will normally be
summarily dismissed”. The Claimant was aware of this.
11. The Respondent’s rules regarding “Employee Usage” were previously
contained in a formal policy. The Claimant was aware of this policy. In relation
to “Staff Buys”, which is the part of the policy relevant to this case, the policy
previously stated (with my emphasis added):
“Staff Buys can only be authorised by a Regional Manager. If an employee
wishes to sell an item(s) of stock to us they must first make the request with
their Line Manager who will then contact a Regional manager on their behalf.
The details of the transaction will be agreed and authorisation given. It will be
deemed as gross misconduct and may result in dismissal if any employee
including members of management conduct Staff Buys Transactions or
Buyback Transactions without the consent of a Regional Manager”.
12. This policy was changed on 22 October 2024 and this change was
communicated to the Claimant on 30 October 2024. He had received this email.
3

Case Number: 6022319/2025
However, a new formal policy was not created which looked similar to the above
mentioned policy. Instead, an email was sent by a director stating:
“COMPANY BUYING FROM STAFF: Store manager has free reign on buying
from staff, plus writing buybacks and pawns for staff. This right does NOT pass
on the ASM when the SM is off. SM themselves continue to need RM approval”.
13. The reason for this change was to give Store Managers more autonomy to
approve their own store’s sales. This freed up time spent by Regional Managers
on providing such approvals. However, Store Managers still needed to obtain
approval in order to minimise the risk of managers abusing their positions of
power. All layers of management required their immediate manager’s approval
to undertake such transactions. This is particularly important given that the
Respondent is an FCA regulated business that predominantly deals in cash.
14. During the Respondent’s cross examination of the Claimant, it was put to the
Claimant that it would be a “plainly ridiculous regime, given the business” for an
employee to be able to sell any item of property to the Respondent for any price
they wanted without obtaining any approvals. The Claimant replied that this was
“possibly” correct.
Shop floor visit
15. On 8 April 2025, Mr Stead emailed Chris Lister (Investigating Officer) explaining
that, on 6 April 2025, he completed a floor walk with the Assistant Manager of
the Claimant’s store and found an overpriced item.
16. These visits are undertaken, typically weekly, to ensure stock is being
replenished and stock pricing is checked, to ensure the Respondent is operating
competitively and to ensure compliance with company policies.
17. This item was an Airbrush and was being priced at £69.99. Mr Stead saw this a
few weeks ago and asked the Assistant Manager where it had come from but
he didn’t know. Mr Stead thought nothing further of it but was concerned to see
it on the shop floor again on 6 April 2025. The Airbrush was brand new, unused
and in its box.
Investigation
18. Upon investigation, which was completed by Mr Lister, it was discovered that
the Claimant had sold the Respondent the Airbrush on 26 March 2025 for £40
but did not obtain authorisation from his Regional Manager. The email recorded
that, when the Claimant was asked why he did not obtain authorisation, he said
that he was not aware of the requirement to do so. The Airbrush was
subsequently sold for £19.99, leading to a financial loss of £20.01 for the
Respondent.
19. Mr Lister asked the Claimant how he had priced the item. There is a dispute on
the facts regarding this. The notes of the investigation record that the Claimant
said he would normally price items by reference to a number of sources, e.g.
4

Case Number: 6022319/2025
Google and eBay but on this occasion he had priced it based on his original
purchase receipt. However, in evidence, the Claimant swore that he had also
considered comparable prices online. I was referred to some documents
showing Airbrush’s for sale on eBay and other sites. The prices ranged from
around £47 to £52. However all of these adverts post-date the Claimant’s
dismissal. They don’t evidence that the Claimant undertook these searches at
the time of selling the item to the Respondent. The notes mentioned in this
paragraph are also contemporaneous. Therefore, on balance, the evidence of
the Respondent is preferred.
20. In addition to the item which is the subject of this claim, the Claimant had sold
items to the Respondent approximately ten times in the past and on all
occasions he had obtained Regional Manager approval. He only sold one item
to the Respondent after the October 2024 change and this was the Airbrush that
is relevant to this case.
21. Mr Lister completed an investigation report on 8 April 2025 and discussed this
with the Claimant on this date.
Disciplinary
22. Following the above, and on the same date, the Claimant was invited to a
disciplinary hearing arranged for 9 April 2025.
23. The Claimant was informed that the allegations being considered against him
were that he had breached the company staff purchasing / selling transaction
policy and that there was financial loss to the business. He was informed that
these allegations could constitute gross misconduct and that the outcome could
be his summary dismissal. He was informed about his right to be accompanied.
Evidence that was to be considered at the hearing was enclosed. He was told
he would be able to present his own evidence at the hearing.
24. The Claimant had consented to the hearing taking place on 9 April 2025 as he
was due to go on holiday the following week. The Respondent had suggested
that the hearing take place on his return from holiday but the Claimant declined.
25. The hearing took place on 9 April 2025. It was chaired by Mr Stead.
26. At the outset of the hearing, it was acknowledged that 48 hours’ notice had not
been provided. The Claimant again confirmed that he had agreed to waive this
and wished to continue.
27. The Claimant acknowledged that he had read the evidence provided. He said
that he genuinely believed the Airbrush was worth £70. He said he had missed
the section of the email dated 22 October 2024 which stated that Store
Managers needed to obtain Regional Manager approval. Mr Stead found this
concerning and did not consider the contents of the email explaining this change
to be difficult to understand, particularly bearing in mind the Claimant’s long
service with the Respondent and his senior role.
5

Case Number: 6022319/2025
28. Mr Stead informed the Claimant that if the policy was read how the Claimant
had interpreted it, this would give Store Managers free reign. He said the policy
had always required Regional Manager approval before Store Managers sold
items to the Respondent. He said, “If you had rang me I would have said no it’s
not worth it, so go and research again”. The Claimant said that it was a stupid
mistake and he had no intention of personal gain.
29. Mr Stead adjourned the disciplinary hearing for nine minutes. On his return, he
informed the Claimant that the policy had been broken and his trust in the
Claimant was gone. He had found that, in the absence of a reasonable
explanation for the Claimant’s conduct, he must have been acted dishonestly.
He had no confidence that the Claimant would not commit further breaches
going forward. Therefore, he would be terminating with immediate effect.
30. The Respondent takes a zero tolerance approach to breaches of these rules.
This is to prevent staff from being able to freely sell their own personal items to
the Respondent without authorisation. If this happened the Respondent could
be exposed to a high volume of overpriced and undesirable stock, leading to
significant financial loss.
31. Mr Stead swore that he had considered the Claimant’s length of service.
However he saw this as an aggravating rather than mitigating factor, given that
an employee of the Claimant’s seniority with such a long period of service
should not have committed such a “cardinal error”.
32. After Mr Stead confirmed this decision, the Claimant said, “How can this be fair
other people keep jobs”. The Claimant did not elaborate on this further and Mr
Stead did not ask him to do so. The Claimant laboured on this significantly in
his cross examination of Mr Stead. However, he did not suggest that he said
this to Mr Stead earlier in the disciplinary meeting, before the decision had been
communicated. Given that he did not raise this to Mr Stead until after Mr Stead
had reached and communicated his decision to dismiss, albeit only orally at that
point, no criticism is made of Mr Stead for not engaging in this point further.
33. On 10 April 2025, Mr Stead confirmed the Claimant’s dismissal in writing and
offered him a right of appeal. The reasons for dismissal were explained as:
“Breach of company staff purchasing/selling transaction policy. Upheld all staff
purchases or selling need authorisation via the Regional/Area Manager, this
policy has been in place for several years, and reminders sent out numerous
times.
Financial loss to the business, upheld paid yourself more than the item was
worth or would sell for, causing financial loss to the store and business”.
34. The notes of the disciplinary hearing were enclosed alongside this letter.
Appeal
6

Case Number: 6022319/2025
35. On 14 April 2025, the Claimant requested an appeal against his dismissal. His
grounds of appeal were:
a. his actions stemmed from a misinterpretation of an updated company
policy, not a deliberate or reckless breach of company rules. He
purchased the item in his own name and other staff members witnessed
the transaction.
b. The revised policy was circulated via a general email in October and was
not accompanied by any formal rollout, briefing, or requirement for signed
acknowledgment. The absence of follow-up or training meant there was
little opportunity to ensure full and accurate understanding of the
changes.
c. the policy made use of abbreviations to refer to managerial roles without
including any key or explanation. This made it difficult to clearly identify
which positions held specific authority, contributing further to the
confusion and his misunderstanding of what was required.
d. the updated policy was more lenient than its predecessor in terms of staff
transactions. In this regard, the Store Manager now had the authority to
complete buybacks involving staff members without any authorisation
required. He said: “while it was mentioned that Regional Manager
approval was required, this condition appeared at the end of the section
outlining the Store Manager's authority, and as such, it was not clearly
emphasised. As a result, this detail got lost in translation, and I
misinterpreted it, not realising that the Regional Manager’s approval was
still necessary for these transactions”.
e. The financial loss to the business arose because the Respondent did not
give the Airbrush time to be sold at the value that the Claimant expected
it to be sold at.
f. He had been employed by the Respondent for ten years during which he
had consistently followed policies. He did not believe this had been
properly considered.
g. He considered dismissal for gross misconduct to be too harsh,
considering that he believed gross misconduct ordinarily referred to very
serious actions, such as fraud and physical violence. He considered a
lesser sanction to be more appropriate.
h. He felt he had been unfairly targeted during the process, given that the
Airbrush had already been on the shop floor for several weeks without
any issues being raised and noting that new management had been put
in place.
36. The Respondent acknowledged this request the following day and, on 19 April
2025, formally invited the Claimant to an appeal meeting arranged for 22 April
7

Case Number: 6022319/2025
2025 to be chaired by Mr Ward. The Claimant was reminded about his right to
be accompanied.
37. The appeal hearing took place on 22 April 2025. It lasted 45 minutes.
38. At the outset the Claimant said that he had been told that Mr Ward had said that
he did not rate the Claimant as a Store Manager. Mr Ward denied this and
assured the Claimant that he would consider the appeal professionally. Mr Ward
swore that he never said he did not rate the Claimant as a manager, that he had
a very good professional working relationship with the Claimant and that he had
promoted the Claimant to his first managerial post in Wakefield.
39. No evidence was adduced from the person who allegedly heard Mr Ward say
this about the Claimant. The Claimant also agreed for the appeal hearing to take
place before Mr Ward, notwithstanding these alleged concerns. The Claimant
accepted that he and Mr Ward had had a good working relationship.
40. Mr Ward says he asked the Claimant whether he would have phoned him for
approval before selling the Airbrush had he been the Regional Manager at the
time. He says the Claimant said that he would. This is recorded in the notes of
the hearing. However, the Claimant strongly disputes this and, on 30 April 2025,
after receiving the notes of the appeal hearing, the Claimant emailed Ms
McGarvey to correct this point. The Claimant subsequently wrote: “I was not
aware that I needed to contact him”. Ms McGarvey replied on 30 April 2025 and
said that Mr Ward disagreed. As this formed part of Mr Ward’s decision making
(considered later), it is important that I resolve this dispute. I do so in favour of
the Claimant because:
a. The Claimant was insistent throughout the internal proceedings and this
hearing that he thought he did not need manager approval. Although
there are inconsistencies in the Claimant’s position, it would be very
peculiar for the Claimant to have made inconsistent remark as significant
as this at the appeal hearing;
b. Immediately upon the Claimant reviewing the notes he asked for this to
be corrected;
c. Considering other findings I have made, the notes of the appeal hearing
do not appear to be particularly reliable; and
d. Ms McGarvey did not give evidence on this point despite being in the
appeal hearing and giving live evidence at this hearing.
41. The Claimant said that others don’t follow policy and weren’t treated as harshly
as he was. He gave an example regarding an employee involved in the counting
of jewellery. He also referred to a former colleague, DV. Mr Ward did not
enquire further regarding this. He did not offer to investigate either cases further
before reaching his decision.
8

Case Number: 6022319/2025
42. When emailing Ms McGarvey and asking for the notes of the appeal meeting to
be corrected, the Claimant also stated: “You have also omitted the part where I
was expressing my concerns regarding the process. Tony interrupted me during
this section, stating that he was getting “annoyed”. I also attempted to reel off
examples of other members of staff who had breached far more serious policies,
but I was cut off by Tony and not given the opportunity to express these
concerns further. This was a significant moment in the conversation, as I had
several additional concerns that I felt could not be addressed at the time due to
the interruption”.
43. This was not considered by Mr Ward at the time. He saw this for the first time
when this email was brought to his attention during cross examination. This is
because Ms McGarvey did not bring it to his attention at the time. When
discussing the Claimant’s request for the notes to be amended, Ms McGarvey
only asked Mr Ward about the Claimant’s contention that he hadn’t said he
would have obtained Mr Ward’s approval had he been Regional Manager at the
time.
44. The evidence about whether Mr Ward had said he was getting annoyed during
the hearing was inconclusive. The Claimant was adamant that he said he was.
Again, he had asked for the notes to be updated to reflect this soon after
receiving them. Mr Ward had no recollection of saying this. However, given that
he was frustrated with the Claimant’s representations and concluded that these
lacked credibility, it is perhaps understandable why he may have got annoyed.
He also gave relatively short shrift to the Claimant’s representations concerning
inconsistency which is consistent with the Claimant’s account in the above
mentioned email. On balance, it is more likely than not that he did say he was
getting annoyed.
45. Although not reflected in the brief notes of the appeal hearing, Mr Ward gave a
substantial amount of evidence about the Claimant’s assertions that the policy
made use of abbreviations to refer to managerial roles without including any key
or explanation. Specifically, the Claimant had said that the abbreviations used
in the 22 October 2024 email for “AM” and “RM” were unclear. Mr Ward
explained that these abbreviations were commonplace within the Respondent,
especially the management team. He could not see how the Claimant, a Store
Manager with 10 years’ experience, had any issues interpreting them. The
Claimant also accepted that he had not sought clarity on this policy change
which Mr Ward would have expected the Claimant to have done if he was
genuinely unclear. Mr Ward also found the Claimant’s position on this to be
contradictory, considering what was said at the disciplinary hearing. The
relevant part of the email which changed the policy stated: “This right does NOT
pass on the ASM when the SM is off. SM themselves continue to need RM
approval”. The Claimant had said that he had “missed” the last sentence.
However, had he missed the last sentence, he also could not have been
confused about the use of these abbreviations.
46. The Respondent also asked the Claimant about this in cross examination. The
Claimant replied, “I brought them up because it could have been misinterpreted.
Email rather than official policy. Should have been written better”. This and other
9

Case Number: 6022319/2025
points led the Respondent’s counsel to put to the Claimant: “Can you see how
this makes you look dishonest and shifty? You don’t own it, you try and deflect
and focus on other people”. The Claimant replied: “Why would I risk a £40k per
year job for £40. We were on the verge of trying to buy a house. I’m not that
stupid”.
47. At the end of the appeal hearing, Mr Ward said that he wouldn’t make a decision
that day.
48. On 29 April 2025, Mr Ward wrote to the Claimant to confirm the outcome of the
appeal, namely that it had not been upheld.
49. Mr Ward acknowledged that changes to the “Employee Usage” policy had been
made over the years but it had consistently been the case that Store Managers
required Regional Manager approval before selling items to the store.
50. He referred to what he considered to be the Claimant’s concession during the
appeal hearing that he would have sought his approval to the purchase had he
been the Claimant’s Regional Manager at the time. Mr Ward considered this to
contradict the Claimant’s assertions that he was not aware that Regional
Manager approval was needed.
51. He explained that he did not accept that the Claimant was unaware of the
abbreviations or that the use of these in the policy change email would have
created confusion.
52. He disputed the Claimant’s assertion that there was no financial loss, given that
the Respondent paid the Claimant more for the Airbrush than the Respondent
was able to recover from a customer.
53. In respect of sanction, Mr Ward concluded: “A lesser role was considered
however after great consideration it was my belief that the severity of the
offence, typically involves actions that are intentionally wrong, and demonstrate
a reckless disregard for rules and regulations that the company has set out. A
lessor role does not sufficiently address these issues or restore the trust that
has been broken and therefore agree that dismissal was the appropriate
sanction”.
54. In respect of the points that the Claimant raised during the meeting about
consistently, Mr Ward stated: “In relation to the example of the employee that
you gave then I cannot comment on the detail of another employee but can
assure you that the company adopts the same policy for all employees”.
Allegations of inconsistent treatment
55. Although some reference was made to them at the end of the disciplinary
hearing (after the dismissal decision had been communicated) and during the
appeal hearing, a significant amount of time was spent, during these
10

Case Number: 6022319/2025
proceedings, on the Claimant’s suggestion that he had been treated
inconsistently compared to a number of alleged comparators.
56. Mrs McGarvey has worked for the Respondent as the HR Manager since May
2016. She swore that, from her experience of supporting disciplinary hearings,
the decision to dismiss the Claimant was neither disproportionate nor
inappropriate in the circumstances and was instead consistent with the
Respondent’s general approach towards and application of the “Employee
Usage” rules.
57. In respect of the alleged comparators relied upon by the Claimant, and taking
each in turn:
a. CM – the Claimant said that CM had failed to follow the jewellery security
policy, leading to lost items, but he was not dismissed. This was largely
agreed by the Respondent save that there was a dispute between the
parties about whether CM had acted dishonestly or not. CM had attended
a disciplinary hearing to consider allegations that he had not followed
company policy/process and financial loss had been suffered. During the
disciplinary hearing he accepted he was at fault by not undertaking the
stock counts correctly. The notes do not suggest that he sought to excuse
his behaviour in any way. The Respondent decided to issue him with a
final written warning. Ms McGarvey’s evidence was that the failure in
question had not been categorised as gross misconduct. She also said
that he had been responsible for “sloppy” stock taking and it had not been
concluded that he had acted dishonestly. Although Mr Ward was not
involved in this case, he read the documents that I had been provided
with and provided evidence about this when being cross examined by
the Claimant. He said that it appeared in CM’s case to be a capability
rather than conduct issue. He said capability issues require additional
training and support. He drew a comparison between CM’s case and the
Claimant’s, namely that it hadn’t been concluded that CM had acted
dishonestly or that CM had received a financial gain. The Claimant had
no direct involvement in CM’s case. CM did not give evidence himself.
The evidence that the Respondent was able to give was therefore much
more reliable and is preferred.
b. AS – the Claimant said AS had threatened a customer with a hammer on
the shop floor. Ms McGarvey said that AS had been verbally threatened
by a customer which led to AS hitting a hammer on the countertop. The
Respondent had concluded that AS was acting out of self defence and
was issued with a final written warning rather than be dismissed. The
Claimant did not pursue his arguments regarding this comparator with
any vigour during this hearing. As Ms McGarvey is likely to have been
better informed about AS’ case than the Claimant, her evidence in
relation to this matter is likely to be more reliable and is therefore
preferred.
c. KF – the Claimant alleged KF had misused customer accounts, including
dead customer accounts, to conceal poor buybacks and faulty purchases
11

Case Number: 6022319/2025
but he was not dismissed. Ms McGarvey said that she had no
involvement in the case save for preparing KF’s invitation to disciplinary
hearing letter. However, as part of preparing her supplemental witness
statement, she had liaised with the manager responsible for KF’s
disciplinary who had elected not to dismiss because KF had only been a
Store Manager for four months and there had been gaps in the training
and support provided to him. He had also concluded that the breaches
were not malicious or for personal gain. The notes of the disciplinary
meeting record the Respondent concluding at the time: “You have
admitted that what you did is wrong and you didn’t follow my instructions.
I am satisfied that you made no personal gain from these transactions
however using dead customer’s accounts is fraudulent. Based on this
meeting I am issuing you with a conduct final written warning and due to
the seriousness of our findings you are being demoted”. His salary was
reduced as a consequence. Considering the objective and
contemporaneous evidence and noting the Claimant’s comparative lack
of involvement in this case to the Respondent’s, the evidence of the
Respondent is preferred.
d. MB – the Claimant alleged that MB had caused a shortfall of around £800
through cash handling errors. Ms McGarvey again candidly accepted that
she had no involvement in the case. However, as part of preparing her
supplemental witness statement she looked into it. She found that the
error was looked into informally, following which it was concluded that
BM was not responsible for the discrepancy. Although none of the
witnesses could give reliable evidence about this matter, as with the
above, Ms McGarvey is likely to have been better informed about this
case than the Claimant, resulting in her evidence in relation to this matter
being more reliable and is therefore preferred.
e. DV – the Claimant said that DV had stolen stock from stores, was
dismissed and then re-hired. Ms McGarvey’s original witness statement
stated that DV was dismissed for gross misconduct for theft. However,
the documents presented to me showed that DV was made redundant,
rather than being dismissed for misconduct. In her supplemental witness
statement, Ms McGarvey accepted this but maintained her awareness
that there was a gross misconduct issue. She also said that DV was and
remained a longstanding family friend of the Respondent’s founders. Ms
McGarvey accepted that DV was later reemployed by the Respondent
however this decision was made at Board level and she was not involved
in it. I have found that this was a case in which DV had originally been
found to have acted dishonestly but that, due to his relationship with the
Respondent’s founders, they had treated him more leniently.
The Law
Unfair dismissal
58. The relevant parts of s.98 Employment Rights Act 1996 (ERA) state:
12

Case Number: 6022319/2025
(1) In determining for the purposes of this Part whether the dismissal of an
employee is fair or unfair, it is for the employer to show—
a. the reason (or, if more than one, the principal reason) for the
dismissal…
b. that it is either a reason falling within subsection (2) or some other
substantial reason of a kind such as to justify the dismissal of an
employee holding the position which the employee held.
(2)
(b) relates to the conduct of the employee;
(3) …
(4) Where the employer has fulfilled the requirements of subsection (1), the
determination of the question whether the dismissal is fair or unfair (having
regard to the reason shown by the employer)—
a. depends on whether in the circumstances (including the size and
administrative resources of the employer's undertaking) the
employer acted reasonably or unreasonably in treating it as a
sufficient reason for dismissing the employee, and
b. shall be determined in accordance with equity and the substantial
merits of the case.
59. In misconduct dismissals, there is well-established guidance for Tribunals on
fairness within section 98(4) in the decisions in Burchell 1978 IRLR 379 and
Post Office v Foley 2000 IRLR 827. The Tribunal must decide whether the
employer had a genuine belief in the employee’s guilt. Then the Tribunal must
decide whether the employer held such genuine belief on reasonable grounds
and after carrying out a reasonable investigation. In all aspects of the case,
including the investigation, the grounds for belief, the penalty imposed, and the
procedure followed, in deciding whether the employer acted reasonably or
unreasonably within section 98(4), the Tribunal must decide whether the
employer acted within the band or range of reasonable responses open to an
employer in the circumstances. It is immaterial how the Tribunal would have
handled the events or what decision it would have made, and the Tribunal must
not substitute its view for that of the reasonable employer (Iceland Frozen
Foods Limited v Jones 1982 IRLR 439, Sainsbury’s Supermarkets Limited
v Hitt 2003 IRLR 23, and London Ambulance Service NHS Trust v Small
2009 IRLR 563).
60. In regard to inconsistency of treatment, in Hadjioannou v Coral Casinos Ltd
1981 IRLR 352 (which was subsequently endorsed by the Court of Appeal in
Securicor Ltd v Smith 1989 IRLR 356) the EAT recognised the importance of
consistency of treatment and held that unreasonableness based on
inconsistency of treatment would only be relevant in limited circumstances:
a. where employees have been led by an employer to believe that certain
conduct will not lead to dismissal;
b. where evidence of other cases being dealt with more leniently supports
a complaint that the reason stated for dismissal by the employer was not
the real reason; or
13

Case Number: 6022319/2025
c. where decisions made by an employer in truly parallel circumstances
indicate that it was not reasonable for the employer to dismiss.
Submissions
61. Both parties provided oral submissions. They are not set out in detail in these
Reasons but both parties can be assured that I have considered all the points
made and all the authorities relied upon, even where no specific reference is
made to them.
Conclusions
Reason for dismissal
62. During this hearing, the Claimant accepted that he sold the Airbrush to his store
without obtaining the appropriate authorisation from the Regional Manager.
Therefore, he conceded that the Respondent had reasonable grounds for
genuinely believing that he had committed the act of misconduct complained of
and that a reasonable investigation, prior to forming this belief, had been
undertaken. Therefore, the Respondent had a fair reason for the Claimant’s
dismissal: conduct.
63. The crux of the complaint is therefore around the reasonableness of the
Respondent’s process and decision making. This requires me to draw
conclusions in respect of the following issues:
a. Did any procedural irregularities render the process followed outside of
the range of reasonable responses?
b. Was the decision to dismiss within the range of reasonable responses?
c. Did the Respondent act reasonably in respect to its approach to the
comparator issue?
64. Taking each of these in turn:
Procedural issues
65. The evidence relevant to the disciplinary proceedings was provided to the
Claimant in advance of the disciplinary hearing. He had read it. There was not
sufficient notice for the disciplinary hearing but this was the Claimant’s choice.
He was asked on several occasions whether he would prefer for the hearing to
take place after his holiday and he said he would not.
66. The notes of the appeal hearing were not representative of the discussions that
took place. But considering the size of the Respondent’s undertaking, its
approach to this was not unreasonable.
67. Mr Ward was not biased towards the Claimant. The Claimant accepted that they
both had a good working relationship, that Mr Ward had promoted him and he
14

Case Number: 6022319/2025
had not asked for the hearing to be conducted by someone else. Mr Ward did
get frustrated during the hearing however this is likely to have been because
the Claimant’s representations did not make sense and he suspected the
Claimant was not telling him the truth.
68. A reasonable employer would have engaged further with the Claimant’s
assertions regarding inconsistency of treatment. They would have asked the
Claimant more questions about the points he was raising and taken more time
to investigate them before reaching their decision. However, considering the
steps that the Respondent did take during the various processes, this failure did
not render the procedure as a whole as outside of the range of reasonable
responses. Further, given the conclusions I have reached in respect of the
comparator issue below, this is very unlikely to have made a difference to the
decision.
Sanction
69. It was reasonable for the Respondent to be suspicious about the
representations that the Claimant gave during the disciplinary and appeal
proceedings. This is because:
a. The Claimant had said that he had misunderstood the changes that had
been made to the Employee Usage policy, in part, because the revised
Employee Usage policy had not been documented in the same way as
its predecessor. Whilst that may reasonably give rise to some confusion
for an employee, the part of the policy relevant to the Claimant’s own
sales to the Respondent had not changed. Nothing in the policy gave the
Claimant a right to sell items to the Respondent without manager
approval. Had this been changed, it is very likely the Claimant would have
noted it. However, given the Respondent’s reasons for having this policy
in the first place, as explained earlier, it is very unlikely that this would
have been changed. As a manager himself, the Claimant would have
been aware of the vulnerabilities the Respondent could have faced if it
had given employees free reign to sell items to the Respondent. It was
reasonable for the Respondent to doubt the Claimant’s belief that this
policy had changed in this way.
b. The Claimant’s account of his misunderstanding of the changes to the
Employee Usage policy were inconsistent. On one hand he had said that
he did not read the last sentence of the email containing the revised
policy, which read: “SM themselves continue to need RM approval”. On
the other hand, he said he was confused about these abbreviations. If he
had not read this last sentence, he would not have noted these
abbreviations. It was reasonable for this to result in the Respondent
doubting the Claimant’s honesty.
c. Linked to (b), the Claimant’s assertion that the policy’s use of
abbreviations, to refer to managerial roles, making it difficult to clearly
identify which positions held specific authority, significantly impacted
upon his credibility. He was a Store Manager himself. He ought to have
15

Case Number: 6022319/2025
been aware that SM meant Store Manager. His direct line manager was
a Regional Manager. He ought to have been aware that RM meant
Regional Manager. As with the above, it was reasonable for this to result
in the Respondent doubting the Claimant’s honesty.
70. The Respondent did consider the Claimant’s long service but this was an
aggravating factor. Someone of the Claimant’s seniority, who had been working
for the Respondent for the amount of time that the Claimant had, would have
been aware that selling the Airbrush to the Respondent without Regional
Manager approval would have been prohibited. This meant that the Claimant
must have sold it dishonestly.
Comparator issue
71. I have considered the evidence in conjunction with the case law, including
Hadjioannou. It is the third of the Hadjioannou factors mentioned above that is
relevant to this case.
72. Like some of his alleged comparators, the Claimant had failed to follow process.
However, the distinguishing factor in the Claimant’s case was that the
Respondent had found that he had done this dishonestly. Therefore the only
alleged comparator that is actually comparable is DV.
73. I have considered whether the Claimant and DV were in truly parallel
circumstances resulting in the different decisions indicating that it was not
reasonable for the Respondent to dismiss the Claimant and have concluded
that this did not render the decision to dismiss the Claimant unreasonable
because:
a. DV was dismissed. He was in the same position as the Claimant initially.
However, his dismissal was referred to as a redundancy because of his
relationship with the founders; and
b. DV was re-engaged. However, again, this was because of his
relationship with the founders.
74. The Claimant did not have such a relationship with the founders. Whilst it is
peculiar that the Respondent chose to re-hire someone who had committed
gross misconduct, this meant that the Claimant and DV were not in truly parallel
circumstances.
75. For these reasons, the Respondent did act reasonably. Both the processes
followed and the decision reached were within the range of reasonable
responses. The Claimant was not unfairly dismissed and his claim is dismissed.
Chris McAvoy Newns
Employment Judge McAvoy Newns
16

Case Number: 6022319/2025
27 October 2025
Sent to the parties on:
For the Tribunal:
…………………………….
17