Bullying at work
1 . What bullying is
Although there is no legal definition of bullying, it can be described as unwanted behaviour from a person or group that is either:
offensive, intimidating, malicious or insulting
an abuse or misuse of power that undermines, humiliates, or causes physical or emotional harm to someone
Bullying might:
be a regular pattern of behaviour or a one-off incident
happen face-to-face, on social media, in emails or calls
happen at work or in other work-related situations
not always be obvious or noticed by others
It's possible someone might not know their behaviour is bullying. It can still be bullying even if they do not realise it or do not intend to
bully someone.
Examples of bullying
Examples of bullying at work could include:
constantly criticising someone's work
spreading malicious rumours about someone
constantly putting someone down in meetings
deliberately giving someone a heavier workload than everyone else
excluding someone from team social events
putting humiliating, offensive or threatening comments or photos on social media
Upward bullying
Bullying can also happen from staff towards someone more senior, for example a manager. This is sometimes called 'upward bullying'
or 'subordinate bullying'.
It can be from one employee or a group of employees.
Examples of upward bullying can include:
showing continued disrespect
refusing to complete tasks
spreading rumours
constantly undermining someone's authority

doing things to make someone seem unskilled or unable to do their job properly
It can be difficult for someone in a senior role to realise they're experiencing bullying behaviour from their staff.
It's important to consider the real reasons for the behaviour. For example, there might be a wider issue with the culture of the
organisation that can be identified and addressed.
When bullying might be harassment
Bullying and harassment are often confused. By law (Equality Act 2010), bullying behaviour can be harassment if it relates to any of
the following 'protected characteristics':
age
disability
gender reassignment
race
religion or belief
sex
sexual orientation
Bullying that's not classed as harassment could still lead to other legal issues. For example, severe bullying might contribute towards
constructive dismissal.
Employer responsibilities
Employers and employees have a mutual duty to treat each other honestly and with respect.
This means employees have the right to:
have trust and confidence in their employer
expect not to be bullied at work
Employers have the right to:
expect employees not to bully each other
expect employees to treat their managers with respect and follow all reasonable instructions
Employers also have a legal duty of care to protect their employees from harm. This includes dealing with bullying issues.
Employers should:
do all they can to try to prevent bullying happening
take any bullying complaint seriously and look into it as soon as possible

2. If you think you're being bullied
If you think you're being bullied at work, you can take steps to deal with it.
Consider whether something is bullying
Sometimes, what seems like bullying might not be. Before you take any other action, you could talk it through with someone you trust.
Talking it through can sometimes help you see the situation in a different way.
Example of behaviour that's not bullying
Caro finds part of their job difficult and makes mistakes. Their manager Ray finds some mistakes with Caro's work and talks to them
privately. Ray explains the problems and how to correct them. Caro is not used to being criticised and thinks they're being treated
unfairly. They feel Ray is a bully. In this situation, Ray is not bullying but acting appropriately as a manager.
Example of bullying that's not intentional
Ray finds Caro does not accept feedback. Because of this, Ray starts checking all of Caro's work and sends emails about every
mistake, however small. Ray is frustrated about the impact of Caro's mistakes on the team's work. This comes across in Ray's tone,
and they say things like "another silly mistake". Although Ray does not realise it, this is likely to be bullying behaviour.
Example of deliberate bullying
Ray gets fed up with Caro's mistakes. They start to pick on Caro in front of others, saying Caro can only cope with simple tasks.
Sometimes Ray copies other people into emails criticising Caro's work. Ray's aim is to make Caro so uncomfortable they look for
another job. Ray's behaviour is now open and serious bullying.
Talk with someone
In some cases, the person you think has bullied you might not realise the impact of their behaviour. You could talk with them, if you
feel you can.
If you decide to talk to them:
explain what they did and how it made you feel
stay calm
be firm, not aggressive
If you do not feel comfortable talking with the person directly, you could:
put this in an email
ask for support from a trade union representative, if you're a trade union member
talk with your manager or someone else at work you feel comfortable with
Keeping a record
It's a good idea to keep a diary or record of the bullying, including:

what happened
how it made you feel
dates and times it happened
any evidence, for example emails or screenshots of social media posts
any witnesses
Most bullying happens out of sight of others, so you might not have any witnesses. This should not stop you reporting the bullying.
Raising the problem informally
It's usually best to raise the problem informally first. You can do this with your manager. Informal resolution is usually quicker and less
stressful for everyone.
If your manager is the person bullying you, you can talk to someone else. Your organisation might have a policy on who to talk to in
this situation, for example another manager or HR. If there's no policy, you can decide who to raise it with.
Raising the problem formally
You can raise a grievance if:
you've already tried to resolve things informally but it did not work
you feel the situation is too serious to be resolved informally
Raising a grievance is where you make a formal complaint to your employer.
What your employer should do
Your employer should take any complaint of bullying seriously and look into it as soon as possible.
If you have to leave your job because of bullying
If you have to leave your job because of severe bullying that your employer did nothing about, you might be able to make a claim to an
employment tribunal for constructive dismissal.
Resigning from your job is a big step to take. You should consider this very carefully.
