Changing your employees' contracts
1 . Considering changes
An employment contract between an employer and an employee or worker is a legally binding agreement.
You can agree the terms and conditions of the contract either:
in writing, for example in a job offer letter
verbally, for example during a conversation when you offer the job
Both you and the employee or worker can propose changes to the agreed terms and conditions, but you must both agree to the
changes.
In some circumstances, you might have an agreement with a trade union that allows the union to negotiate and agree certain contract
changes on behalf of employees and workers.
Changing a contract is sometimes called 'varying a contract'.
How employment contract changes can be agreed
Changes to employment contracts can be agreed in different ways, including when:
a change is proposed by either you, or one or more employees or workers, which you then discuss and agree with them
you have a 'collective agreement' with a trade union and the union agrees changes to terms and conditions on behalf of your
employees or workers
employees or workers agreed to a term in the contract (a 'flexibility clause' or 'variation clause') that lets you change certain
employment terms in some circumstances
a change happens through 'custom and practice' – terms and conditions change over time and everyone's agreement can be
implied
What to consider first
As an employer, before you propose an employment contract change you should consider:
what issue you're trying to solve
if a contract change is definitely needed to solve it
This can help you be clear about what you want to achieve and the different ways you could achieve it.

For example, a business is looking to reduce costs. Before considering potential contract changes, they might look at:
how they can improve ways of working
if they can make savings elsewhere
It will help when informing and consulting with employees and representatives if you have:
explored other options
made clear why you need a contract change
The importance of following a fair procedure
You must follow the Code of Practice on dismissal and re-engagement on GOV.UK. You might have your own dismissal and reengagement policy, but the Code is the minimum procedure you must follow.
If a case reaches an employment tribunal, the judge will consider whether the employer has followed the Code of Practice in a fair way.
When you might consider employment contract changes
Examples of when employers might need to consider employment contract changes include:
to make sure contracts are up to date with new laws or regulations
to better reflect someone's job role, if it has changed
to introduce or change terms and conditions, for example contractual redundancy pay, enhanced maternity or paternity leave
and pay, or details of a pension scheme
to reflect changes to an organisation, for example if it's considering moving to a different location
helping an organisation better adapt to changing customer needs
economic reasons, for example if an organisation is considering a restructure or other changes to stay competitive in a
changing market
While in some circumstances changing an employment contract can bring benefits to an organisation and its employees, it can also
bring significant risks. You should think carefully about the best way to address the issue you're trying to solve.
Risks to consider
Changing contracts can sometimes cause tensions in an organisation. If changes are not managed well then risks may include:
damaging working relations
legal claims, for example claims of breach of contract or constructive dismissal
a decrease in commitment and performance, if employees do not support the changes, or feel they have not had the
opportunity to inform decisions
increased levels of stress or absence
discrimination, for example if changes are introduced that apply to a group of employees but put employees with a certain
'protected characteristic' at a disadvantage
valued people leaving an organisation, if you propose a change they do not support or agree to

reputational damage to an organisation or brand, making it difficult to attract new employees
strikes or other industrial action if there's a trade union
collective action by a group of employees that's not authorised by a trade union ('wildcat' industrial action)
Understanding your options for making a change
If you feel you might need to propose a contract change, your approach to exploring the change may depend on:
the number of employees or workers affected
whether your organisation has a recognised trade union or other established ways of consulting employees
For example, a company is considering a change that is specific to a certain employee. They should discuss and try to agree the
change with them directly. They should include their representative if they have one.
A change might affect a number of employees' contracts. It might be more appropriate and effective to discuss this with any employee
representatives as well as individual employees. For example, if there is a trade union, employee forum or joint consultative committee
in your organisation.
By law, you must consult with a recognised trade union if you're considering changes to terms and conditions agreed with that union.
If there has been a TUPE transfer
TUPE regulations protect employment rights when someone transfers to a new employer. TUPE stands for Transfer of Undertakings
(Protection of Employment).
There are important additional considerations if you're thinking about proposing changes to an employment contract after a TUPE
transfer.
When employees or workers might propose contract changes
In some circumstances, employees or workers might want to propose an employment contract change. For example, if:
their job role has changed since they started working for you
they want to ask for improved terms and conditions, such as a pay rise or extra holiday
they want to?make a flexible working request
You do not have to agree to every change proposed by an employee or worker. You should always listen to them and consider their
proposal.

2. Proposing changes
When you're proposing employment contract changes, you must inform all affected employees and workers and any relevant
employee representatives.
You must inform them about:
what the proposed changes are
who might be affected
why the changes may be needed
the timeframe for the proposed changes
any other options that have been considered
If you exclude or overlook someone
There may be a risk of discrimination if, for example, you exclude or accidentally overlook:
anyone who is absent, for example off sick or on adoption, maternity or paternity leave
anyone who needs information communicated in a certain way, for example because of a disability or if English is not their first
language
Providing information about the proposed changes
You must provide relevant information about the proposed changes. This is so employees, workers and any representatives can
understand, consider and reach an informed view about them.
Providing clear information as early as possible helps:
give enough time for everyone to consider the proposed changes and how they wish to respond
explain what other options have been considered and why they are not considered appropriate
build trust by giving employees a say and assuring them you want to hear their concerns and suggestions
everyone work together to find solutions if there's any disagreement about the proposed changes
Informing employees
You should think carefully about how and when it would be best to communicate the proposals. Announcing proposed contract
changes can sometimes cause concern among employees.
If any proposed changes are specific to a certain employee, you should discuss them privately. For example, in a meeting between the
employee and their line manager.
If the proposed changes apply to a number of employees, it may be appropriate to have initial meetings with small groups of
employees. In these meetings you could discuss the broad context of the proposed changes.
After any meeting, you should put information in writing and share it with the affected employees.
Informing trade union and employee representatives

By law, you must provide relevant information to trade union representatives if your proposed changes are covered by a 'collective
agreement'. This is an agreement with a recognised trade union.
You must always follow the Acas Code of Practice on disclosure of information to trade unions for collective bargaining purposes.
Even if there is no recognised trade union, in larger organisations or teams it can be useful to have arrangements to inform and consult
with other employee representatives. For example, an employee forum or joint consultative committee which includes both
management and employee representatives.
You must also keep all affected employees informed about any proposals. For example, not all employees will be members of a trade
union, so they may not receive updates from the union representatives.
What information you should provide
The information you should provide to staff and their representatives about the proposed changes will depend on the circumstances.
You should usually include the following in the initial information:
what the proposed changes involve
the business reasons for the changes
when you propose to introduce the changes
your view on how the changes could benefit employees
your view on how the organisation will be affected if you do not make the changes
what the proposed new or revised contractual terms will look like
any alternatives to the proposed changes that you've considered
It should also explain:
that employees should consider the proposed changes
a consultation process will follow to consider any questions, concerns or suggestions
if any discussions have already taken place with relevant employee representatives such as a recognised trade union or a joint
consultative committee
how employees can ask questions and give feedback about the proposed changes, or make any alternative suggestions
where employees can get help or support, for example an employee assistance programme (EAP) if there is one
You should aim to be as open and helpful as possible in responding to any requests for information on proposed changes from
employees or their representatives.
If there are trade union or employee representatives
If there are trade union or other employee representatives, you should talk to them to try to reach an agreed understanding about the
information that would be useful to share.
You should discuss:
what information is likely to be reasonably required and helpful
how the information can best be provided
who needs the information
when it should be shared

Agreeing these points can help avoid misunderstandings, save time and reduce costs during negotiations about changing contracts.
If you cannot provide relevant information
In some circumstances, it may be reasonable to refuse a request for certain information. For example, if information cannot be shared
because it is confidential or commercially sensitive.
If you feel you need to refuse a request, you should explain the reasons as clearly as possible.
If you unreasonably refuse to provide information
If you unreasonably refuse to provide information and then make a contract change, you could later be challenged about this if you're
taken to an employment tribunal.
For example, it might be a relevant factor in claims of breach of contract or constructive dismissal.
A trade union might legally challenge you if you have not followed the Acas Code of Practice on disclosure of information to trade
unions for collective bargaining purposes.
If the change might be covered by a flexibility clause
There may be a clause previously agreed in the contract that might allow you to change certain terms and conditions in some
circumstances. These are sometimes called 'flexibility' or 'variation' terms or clauses.
For example, a clause in a contract might say that in certain circumstances an employee's working days or work location could change.
You should make sure any flexibility clause:
is clear and easy to understand
provides reasonable advance notice before you introduce any relevant contract change
Using flexibility clauses reasonably
Flexibility clauses must only be used to make reasonable changes.
For example, it may be unreasonable to expect someone to move at short notice to another work location which is not within
reasonable commuting distance. If it's not reasonable, doing this may be a breach of contract even if there is a flexibility clause that
appears to allow it.
If you use a flexibility clause to make a change without providing reasonable notice or consulting affected employees or
representatives, it could lead to claims of breach of contract or constructive dismissal.
Considering risks of discrimination
You should carefully consider if there might be a risk of discrimination when using a flexibility clause.
For example, it could be discrimination if you change an employee's contractual working hours and this makes it difficult for them to
effectively manage their disability.

Consulting employees and representatives
You should always consult employees and employee representatives, even if you think the change may be covered by a flexibility
clause. This can help to:
make sure everyone is clear about what has been proposed
understand someone’s circumstances, and if there are any consequences for them that you should consider
listen to and resolve any concerns
avoid any misunderstandings
reduce any risks of discrimination
decide if the clause is reasonable to use in the circumstances
Resolving concerns about flexibility clauses
If you propose to use a flexibility clause to make a change, your employees or workers might feel it is unreasonable or against the law.
You should try to resolve their concerns at the earliest opportunity.
It can sometimes help to discuss with employees or workers if there is an alternative solution that might work for everyone.

3. Consulting
If you're proposing employment contract changes, you should fully consult with all affected employees, workers and any relevant
employee representatives.
You must have already provided initial information about the proposed contract changes.
What consultation is
Consultation is when you talk and listen to affected employees or workers and any trade union or other relevant employee
representatives. During consultation you should:
help them understand the reasons for the proposed changes
ask for their feedback on the proposed changes
answer any questions
respond to any concerns
listen to any reasons people may have to object to the proposed changes
consider any other proposals they may put forward
consider if you should make any revisions to the proposed changes to address any points raised

Some employees and managers may find a period of change difficult. You should offer help and support, for example through an
employee assistance programme (EAP) if there is one.
Why you should consult
Employees and representatives are much more likely to support changes if they:
understand the reasons behind the proposals
have the opportunity to give their views about them
trust that you have genuinely considered their views and taken them on board
Effective consultation can help you to:
work together with employees and representatives to find the best solution to whatever has led to the proposed changes
gain useful insights from employees' knowledge about their roles and customer needs
build trust and keep good working relations
keep employees motivated and maintain productivity, even during periods of uncertainty about change
prevent potential disagreements, tensions or conflict in your organisation
make sure the process towards any change is fair and reasonable
If employees or representatives feel you have not fully consulted them about a contract change, this can:
significantly reduce the chances of reaching agreement
damage morale, working relations and productivity in your organisation
lead to increased levels of stress or absence
damage the reputation of an organisation or brand, making it difficult to attract new employees
lead to strikes or other industrial action, if there's a trade union
There may also be legal risks if you make a contract change without holding genuine and meaningful consultation with employees and
representatives.
For example, depending on the circumstances, it might lead to legal claims including breach of contract, unauthorised deductions from
wages or constructive dismissal.
Who you should consult
Who you should consult with will depend on the circumstances. You might need to consult with individual employees or workers, their
representatives, or both.
Consulting individual employees or workers
Unless there's a formal arrangement that allows representatives to negotiate contract changes on behalf of employees and workers,
you should always consult directly with each person affected.
Consulting trade union representatives
If your organisation has a recognised trade union, you may have a 'collective agreement' that you must consult with the trade union
about proposed contract changes affecting certain employees or workers. This group of employees or workers is known as the
'bargaining unit'.
If you have a collective agreement:

the trade union can negotiate and agree contract changes on behalf of those in the bargaining unit (known as 'collective
bargaining')
the bargaining unit may include some employees or workers who are not union members as well as those who are union
members
For example, there may be a collective agreement that the trade union can negotiate annual changes to pay on behalf of all employees
who are in a particular role or who work in a certain department.
Consulting information and consultation (ICE) representatives
If there are 50 or more employees in your organisation, employees have the right to request a formal agreement to be informed and
consulted. This is known as an ICE agreement, as it's part of the 'Information and Consultation of Employees' regulations.
If you already have an ICE agreement in your organisation that covers areas affected by your proposed contract changes, you must
consult with the elected representatives.
Consulting employee forums
You may already have an arrangement in your organisation to consult employee representatives on specific areas of terms and
conditions.
For example, some organisations may have:
a joint consultative committee where employee and management representatives work together to promote good practice in the
way an organisation is managed
a pay review forum that considers annual changes to employees' pay or a forum that looks at health and safety at work
Consulting with employee forums can be a valuable way for:
you to discuss proposed changes with employee representatives on relevant terms and conditions
your employees to have a say in important decisions that affect them
Representatives in these forums should be chosen in an appropriate way and consulted on areas in which they have expertise.
Consider risks of discrimination
When consulting, you must include all employees and workers who might be affected. There may be a risk of discrimination if, for
example, you exclude or accidentally overlook:
anyone who is absent, for example off sick or on adoption, maternity or paternity leave
anyone who needs information communicated in a certain way, for example because of a disability or if English is not their first
language
Keeping everyone informed
You should keep everyone updated while you're consulting with employee representatives.

For example, some employees or workers might not be a member of a trade union so you should not rely on them receiving updates
from union representatives.
Acas support for employers
We can:
help you set up an employee forum
work with your management and employee representatives to solve problems
How you should consult
Consultation must always be a genuine and meaningful two-way discussion about whether a change is needed and what kind of
change is appropriate. You must listen openly to any concerns or suggestions and seriously consider them before you make a decision
about the change.
In some situations, consultation might involve negotiations about proposed changes, especially in organisations with an established
collective agreement. In negotiations, you discuss a change with employees or their representatives to try to reach an agreement.
If employees or their representatives raise any questions, concerns or suggestions, you must:
take them seriously
try to understand everyone's needs and interests
do everything you reasonably can to answer questions and address any concerns
If it’s difficult to reach agreement at first
Everyone should be open-minded during consultation. You should be prepared to reconsider your original proposal, for example if:
there's something you may have overlooked
another proposal is put forward that might work better
Reaching agreement is likely to be more difficult if employees or representatives have reasonable objections to your proposal, but you
insist they agree to it.
If you're finding it difficult to reach agreement at first, you should discuss if there might be a suitable compromise. Everyone should:
keep focused on trying to reach agreement for as long as reasonably possible
consider if you can look at the problem from a different angle, including other people's perspectives
encourage others to suggest alternatives they would consider acceptable
explore if there is any way you could reach a compromise
be patient and keep talking to employees and representatives – finding agreed solutions can take time
consider what could happen if agreement cannot be reached
If you can reach a compromise, it's more likely that everyone will support it because they'll believe it's:
been reached fairly and openly
the best decision possible when everyone's views are taken into account

Do not intimidate or threaten employees or their representatives
Employers must never intimidate or threaten employees or their representatives to try to force them to agree to a contract change.
You should carefully consider the best way to have discussions about how the organisation and its employees may be affected if
appropriate changes cannot be agreed. However, you must never present a potential outcome to employees as a threat about what
you will do if they do not accept your proposed change.
Any intimidating or threatening action, language or behaviour is likely to significantly damage trust, morale and working relations in an
organisation.
There are also significant legal risks. For example, any contract change agreed because of intimidation or threats ('under duress') will
not be legally enforceable.
An employer must not cause someone 'detriment' because of trade union membership or activities.
Detriment means someone experiences one or both of the following:
being treated worse than before
having their situation made worse
Examples of detriment could be:
their employer reduces their hours
they experience bullying
they experience harassment
their employer turns down their training requests without good reason
they are overlooked for promotions or development opportunities
Providing training for those involved in consultation and negotiations
If managers and employee representatives are trained to take part in consultation and negotiations constructively, this can:
make discussions more effective
increase the chances of reaching a solution that works well for everyone
Negotiating contract changes can sometimes be complex, challenging and stressful for those involved. If this happens, behaviours on
both sides can sometimes reduce the chances of reaching an agreement.
Training can help all those involved in consultation keep discussions constructive and avoid unhelpful behaviours like:
not listening effectively
making assumptions about others
insisting on a fixed outcome and refusing to consider other suggestions
failing to genuinely explore others' needs and interests
not being willing to consider things objectively
using confrontational language or appearing aggressive
being impatient
adopting an attitude where someone must win and someone must lose
not being open to creative ways of finding workable solutions

4. Handling requests
In some circumstances, employees or workers may ask their employer for changes to their employment contract. For example,
employees may have the legal right to ask for flexible working.
Flexible working requests
By law, someone has the right to ask for a contract change through a 'flexible working request' if they're legally classed as an
employee.
For example, they might ask to:
reduce their hours to work part time
work from home
split their time between their usual place of work and working remotely from somewhere else ('hybrid working')
have flexibility with their start and finish times (sometimes known as 'flexitime')
share the job with someone else
If an employee makes a flexible working request, you must handle the request reasonably.
Other requests for contract changes
An employee might also ask for other kinds of changes to their contract, for example, because:
they've been doing work that is different to what was originally agreed in their contract
they've started a new job in the same organisation
they're keen to develop their skills by taking on new tasks
they're unhappy about something at work, for example they feel bullied and want to change their shifts or work location
they feel they deserve a pay rise
The employee does not have to put the request in writing, but encouraging them to do so can help make sure:
the employee fully considers what they are requesting and why
you have a clear idea about the request and the reasons for it before discussing it with the employee
Consulting with employees and representatives
You should consult with the employee and any employee representatives to:
listen to their reasons why a change may be needed
understand the details of the proposed change
carefully consider how you might be able to accommodate the request, including the potential benefits for you and the
employee

Finding an appropriate solution to a proposed change
If you've considered an employee's request carefully and you feel it may not be appropriate to make the proposed change, you should
consider and discuss any alternative changes that may be suitable.
For example, if an employee requests a change of work location because they feel they're being bullied, you should look into their
concerns and take any appropriate action. Agreeing to relocate them might work as a temporary solution, but may not fully address the
cause of the problem.
It's always important to try to find an appropriate solution to any concerns and understand why an employee has requested a contract
change. Not resolving concerns can lead to longer-term tensions at work. This can affect employee wellbeing and productivity in an
organisation.

5. If changes are agreed
If agreement is reached about contract changes after you've consulted with employees, workers and their representatives, you should:
put any changes in writing
make sure everyone is clear about the details of changes, such as how and when they will take effect, and whether the change
is temporary or permanent
monitor how the changes are working for an appropriate period of time
Putting changes in writing
Employees do not have to sign a new contract for changes to take effect.
However, you must put any changes to an employee's main terms of employment in writing. For example you might send them a letter
or email.
It's a good idea to put all contract changes in writing. This helps to make sure everyone is clear about what has been agreed so there
is less chance of misunderstandings or disagreements.
You can choose to update an employee's written statement of employment particulars but you do not have to.
When you put changes in writing, you should ask the employee to:
check that it describes accurately what they have agreed
let you know if they have any questions or concerns
If a change only affects one employee, you must write to them individually.
If a change affects a number of employees, you may not need to write to everyone separately. This applies when the change is about
something that's in a document everyone can access, for example in a policy. You can put the changes in writing for the whole group
at the same time, for example in a group email.
By law, you must put a change in writing within 1 month of the change.
Making sure everyone is clear about the change
You should make sure everyone affected by an agreed change is clear about how the change affects them. You should explain details
such as:

what the change is
why it has been introduced
exactly what the change will mean for them
when and how it will take effect
for how long it will last, if it's a temporary change
who employees should talk with if they have any questions or concerns
what's expected of them
The best way to communicate with employees about this will depend on the circumstances, for example:
how many people are affected by the change
if everyone affected works in the same location or across different locations
if the change was agreed directly with employees or with employee representatives
If changes affect employees who work in different teams or locations, it can be useful for one person or department to handle all
employees' questions. This can reduce the risk of communicating potentially conflicting information about the details of the changes.
If you have agreed changes with employee representatives, such as a recognised trade union, it can sometimes be helpful for you to
work together to communicate the changes to the affected employees. This can help provide clarity and reassurance that employee
representatives have influenced and support the change.
Monitoring the changes
After changes have been introduced, you should continue to keep open communication with employees for an appropriate period and
review:
if the changes are working as expected for everyone involved
if the changes are being applied consistently and fairly
how employees and the whole organisation are adapting
any other new information related to the changes
Why it's important to monitor how employees respond to change
Changes to terms and conditions can sometimes affect the way people feel emotionally, mentally and physically.
Employees may go through a range of reactions during periods of change. Depending on the circumstances, they may feel uncertain,
anxious or resistant to change.
For example, a period of business reorganisation can affect employees' morale and motivation, as well as levels of commitment and
performance.
Giving employees an opportunity to continue to feedback on changes can help an organisation adapt to change in the best way.
How long you should monitor contract changes for
You should decide a time period for monitoring contract changes that is appropriate to the circumstances. For example, you should
review changes over a longer period of time, such as one year or more, if:
contract changes are significant
there has been resistance to change among employees or their representatives

6. If changes cannot be agreed
It can sometimes feel difficult and time consuming to reach an agreement on a contract change.
It can be particularly difficult if proposed changes are complex. Negotiations can take time, there might be disagreements and times
when it seems like there's no way forward. It can be helpful to remember that:
disagreements often generate new ideas and lead to solutions
there will be benefits for everyone involved if you do reach agreement
there are significant risks for you if you try to change a contract without agreement
Risks of trying to change a contract without agreement can include:
legal claims, for example claims of breach of contract or constructive dismissal
damaging morale and good working relations in an organisation, potentially for a long time
strikes or other industrial action, if there's a trade union
reputational damage to an organisation or brand
How you can keep trying to reach agreement
Sometimes even if you have consulted with employees and employee representatives you might not have been able to reach
agreement. You should continue to explore all options for as long as is reasonably possible.
It can help to consider:
how to keep discussions constructive
if anything might make the proposed changes easier for people to agree
how Acas can work with you and employee representatives to help reach an agreement
Keeping discussions constructive
To stay focused on keeping discussions constructive, it can help to:
share any more relevant information – being transparent about your reasons can help others understand them better and make
discussions more effective
continue to ask questions and listen to answers – taking time to understand other people's views can help you find common
ground
be prepared to consider changes to your original proposal – encourage alternative solutions and be open-minded to them
try to agree one change at a time – it can help to break down complex problems into smaller ones, for example start with 'what'
might need to change, then move on to 'how' and 'when'
recognise that differences of opinion are normal and to be expected – considering different views can lead to new possibilities
to explore
try to find a solution that includes something for everyone – do not assume that someone must win and someone must lose
Making proposed changes easier for people to agree

If employees or representatives are reluctant to agree to a proposed change, you should consider if there's anything you could offer
that could make the proposal more attractive.
In some cases, it might be possible to offer some new, more beneficial terms to compensate for a less attractive change to other
terms. This is sometimes called 'buying out' a term in the contract.
For example, an employer might offer extra paid or unpaid leave to compensate for an unpopular proposal to change agreed shift
patterns.
It can also be helpful to consider if:
a change could be introduced gradually rather than all at once
a change could be introduced on a temporary basis only
you could achieve the aims of a proposed change in a way that might seem fairer and more acceptable, for example by
changing senior managers’ contracts in a similar way to those of other employees
all parts of a proposed change are needed, or if you could achieve some aims in other ways
there are solutions that may not need a contract change
If there's a 'collective agreement' with a trade union, it should set out a 'collective bargaining' procedure for negotiations with the union.
You must not make direct offers to employees or workers as an incentive to give up any of their terms that are covered by the
agreement. The only time you could consider this is if you've followed and genuinely believe you've exhausted the agreed collective
bargaining procedure.
If you make direct offers without first exhausting the agreed procedure, you're likely to be legally challenged about this at an
employment tribunal.
If you decide to go ahead and make a contract change
If you still cannot reach agreement after extensive attempts, it may sometimes be possible to introduce a contractual change by either:
giving notice to the employee that you intend to make a change ('imposing' a change) to their employment contract with effect
from a certain date
giving notice to terminate the employee's existing contract and offering to rehire the employee on the new terms ('dismissing
and rehiring' – some people call this 'fire and rehire')
You should thoroughly explore all other options before deciding to take either of these steps. They both carry significant legal risks and
can damage working relations, morale and levels of performance in your organisation.
Imposing a change
If you impose a change to a contract before getting agreement you will be breaking the agreed contract ('in breach of contract').

In some circumstances, an employee's actions might count as agreeing to ('affirming') the change if:
they continue to work under the changed terms and conditions
they do not inform you that they do not agree to the change
However, if an employee does not agree with an imposed change, they might decide to:
temporarily work to the new terms and conditions, but make it clear they are challenging the change ('working under protest')
resign and make a claim of constructive dismissal at an employment tribunal, if they feel the change significantly breaks their
agreed contract (a 'fundamental breach of contract')
If an employee works under protest
If an employee works under protest, they continue to work under the changed terms, but make it clear that they do not agree to the
change and take steps to challenge it.
An employee should make it clear to you that they're working under protest. They should usually do this in writing on a regular basis,
for example every time they get paid.
They should normally only work under protest for a short time so they can formally raise their concerns with you or take legal action if
you do not resolve their concerns.
For example, depending on the circumstances, an employee could decide to make legal claims against the organisation for:
damages for breach of contract at a civil court
'unlawful deduction of wages' at an employment tribunal, if the change affects their pay
discrimination, if the change means they are treated unfairly in relation to certain 'protected characteristics' under the law
If you impose a change that makes an employee's terms and conditions significantly worse than before, they might be able to claim
unfair dismissal while continuing to work under the changed terms.
If there's a trade union
If you impose a change after not being able to reach agreement with a recognised trade union, the trade union might consider:
taking industrial action – for example a strike, refusing to take part in certain activities, or a 'work to rule' where employees do
no more than what they're contractually required to do
supporting individual employees to make claims to a court or employment tribunal
Dismissing and rehiring
You should only consider dismissing and offering to rehire someone on new terms ('dismissal and re-engagement') as a last resort.
This is sometimes known as 'fire and rehire'.
Before dismissing, you must have made all reasonable attempts to reach agreement through a full and thorough consultation.
If you're proposing to dismiss and rehire 20 or more employees, by law you must collectively consult on the proposed dismissals.
It's important to consider that by ending the employee's original contract of employment you will be dismissing them, even if they
accept a new contract and continue to work for you. So you must:
have a fair reason for dismissal
follow a fair dismissal process
provide the correct amount of notice
offer the employee the right of appeal against their dismissal
It is important to follow a fair procedure as set out in the Code of Practice on dismissal and re-engagement on GOV.UK. This is the
minimum procedure that you must follow.
employees or representatives.

Risks of dismissing and rehiring
Proposing to dismiss and rehire an employee or worker is an extreme step that has significant risks.
You should always carefully consider the risks, even if you feel there's an urgent need to make contract changes and expect it may be
difficult to reach agreement.
It's likely that employees or their representatives will view a proposal to dismiss and rehire as a threat. This might:
cause immediate and long-lasting damage to trust and working relations in an organisation
make it harder for both sides to reach a negotiated solution
Other risks include:
losing valued people from an organisation – either because they do not accept the offer of a new contract, or they leave
afterwards because they're not happy with the change or the way it was made
legal claims, such as potentially costly claims of constructive dismissal and unfair dismissal
reputational damage to an organisation or brand, making it difficult to attract new employees
likely industrial action if there's a trade union, as well as longer-term damage to relations with the union
the issue you're looking to deal with still not being resolved satisfactorily
Consider the reason for dismissal
It's important to consider the reason for the proposed dismissal. This will affect the process you need to follow and any payments you
may need to make to employees.
If the reason for dismissal is redundancy
The reason for dismissal could be redundancy even if you are offering the employee a new contract. For example, it could be a
redundancy situation if:
you're proposing contract changes because the number or types of roles needed to do certain work have changed
the changes you're proposing will significantly change the roles of affected employees
If it is a redundancy situation you must:
follow a fair redundancy process
pay the correct redundancy pay
The Code of Practice on dismissal and re-engagement does not apply to redundancy dismissals.

Other reasons for dismissal
If you dismiss and offer to rehire someone and it is not a redundancy situation, you will need to show you had 'some other substantial
reason' to dismiss if it's challenged at an employment tribunal.
For example, it might be considered 'some other substantial reason' if:
your business is in severe financial distress
you've made exhaustive attempts to reach agreement on contract changes
there was genuinely no other option but to dismiss and offer to rehire
An employment tribunal will consider factors such as:
if you had a good business reason for introducing the change
if you reasonably and genuinely consulted with employees, including making any compromises where appropriate
if it was reasonable for you to decide that the benefits of the change for the organisation outweighed the disadvantages for
affected employees
if the changes you made were reasonable, for example if changes did not unfairly affect the financial wellbeing of employees
the extent to which you considered alternatives to dismissal
if any recognised trade union recommended or objected to the proposed terms
how many employees accepted the change and how many rejected it
if it was reasonable for an employee to refuse the change in the circumstances
If you're proposing to dismiss and rehire 20 or more employees
By law, you must 'collectively consult' if you're proposing to dismiss and rehire 20 or more employees:
at one establishment
within a period of 90 days or less
Collective consultation is when you consult with a recognised trade union or other elected employee representatives. An
'establishment' might be wider than a single workplace, but not necessarily as wide as your whole organisation.
You must collectively consult to explore how to:
avoid the dismissals
reduce the number of dismissals
limit the consequences of the dismissals within the organisation
The law says you must start this consultation 'in good time'. What counts as 'in good time' will depend on the circumstances. However,
you must start consultation for:
20 to 99 employees – at least 30 days before the first proposed dismissal
100 or more employees – at least 45 days before the first proposed dismissal
You must follow the same process as for collective consultation in redundancy situations. This applies even if the reason you're
proposing to dismiss and rehire is not redundancy but 'some other substantial reason'.
If you fail to collectively consult
If you fail to collectively consult, it could lead to a claim for compensation known as a 'protective award'. This can be up to 90 days' full
pay for each affected employee.

If you do not follow the Code of Practice on dismissal and re-engagement on GOV.UK, this could be taken into account by an
employment tribunal making a protective award. If it is found you unreasonably failed to comply, from 20 January 2025 they could
increase the award by up to 25%.
Where it is the employee who has unreasonably failed to comply with the Code, their award may be reduced by up to 25%.