Race discrimination
1 . The law on race discrimination
Race is one of 9 'protected characteristics' covered by discrimination law (Equality Act 2010).
Race discrimination includes direct and indirect discrimination, harassment and victimisation.
Race discrimination can happen in any aspect of work. It can result from decisions made at work or from how people behave towards
each other.
It could be a regular pattern of racist behaviour or a one-off incident. It can happen in the workplace, at work social events or when
people are working remotely.
Terms used around race
The language around race changes over time. And terms that some people are comfortable with might be offensive to others. There's
no one term that everyone will prefer.
What race means by law
The Equality Act 2010 says that people must not be unfairly discriminated against because of:
colour
nationality
ethnic or national origins
Someone's race is made up of a combination of these things. For example:
white, British, of Polish national origin
black, British, of African ethnic origin and Nigerian national origin
Colour
This means skin colour.
Hair colour is not covered by the law.
Nationality

This means someone's current nationality or citizenship, for example British. This can change. Someone's nationality might not be the
same as where they were born.
Ethnic origin
Someone's ethnic origin is defined by the ethnic group they belong to.
An ethnic group is a group of people with a shared history and culture. The group may also share language, religion or geographical
origin. People can belong to more than one ethnic group.
Whether an ethnic group is protected from discrimination can sometimes depend on it being recognised by the courts.
Examples of recognised ethnic groups include:
Irish Travellers
Jewish people
Romany Gypsies
English, Irish, Scottish and Welsh people are all recognised as separate ethnic groups within the UK.
Not all ethnic groups have been recognised as protected by the courts, for example some Gypsy and Traveller groups.
National origin
National origin usually means where someone was born or where their parents are from. It can be different from nationality. For
example someone could have Chinese national origin and British nationality.
Racial group
This is a term used in the Equality Act 2010 to describe any group of people who share one or more aspects of race.
Discrimination because of more than one aspect of race
Discrimination can happen because of one or more aspects of someone's race.
For example, someone born in the UK with Nigerian parents could be discriminated against because of any combination of:
their black skin colour
their British nationality
their Nigerian national origin
Who is protected by race discrimination law
At work, the law protects the following people against discrimination:
employees and workers
contractors and self-employed people hired to personally do the work
job applicants
former employees – usually around providing references
Understanding more about discrimination

2. Types of race discrimination
Race discrimination includes:
direct discrimination
indirect discrimination
harassment
victimisation
It's important to understand the different types of race discrimination. This is so you know what your rights and responsibilities are
under discrimination law (Equality Act 2010).
Direct discrimination
Direct race discrimination is when someone is put at a disadvantage or treated less favourably because of:
their race
the race of someone they have a connection with – this is called 'discrimination by association'
their 'perceived' race, which means thinking someone is a certain race when they are not – this is called 'discrimination by
perception'
Example of direct discrimination
Ade is black. After an argument with someone at work who is white, Ade is given a final written warning. The other person gets a first
written warning. Both were equally to blame but the person who investigated the incident was biased and assumed that Ade had
caused the problem. This is direct discrimination.
Example of discrimination by association
Robin, who's white British, is not given an opportunity to work with a new client. It could have meant a large commission and a bonus.
Robin's partner is from India. The management team said that might jeopardise a deal with the client, because they heard the client's
chief executive will only work with people who represent 'white British culture'. This is discrimination by association.
Example of discrimination by perception

Janina applies for a job and is rejected. The employer thinks the name sounds Lithuanian and is prejudiced against people from
Eastern Europe. Janina is actually of Anglo-French national origin. This is discrimination by perception. If Janina was Lithuanian it
would be direct discrimination.
Indirect discrimination
Indirect race discrimination is when a working practice, policy or rule applies to everyone but puts a person or group at a disadvantage
because of their race.
Example 1 – indirect discrimination
A cleaning company needs to reduce their number of cleaners. The company uses English language skills as one of their redundancy
selection criteria.
Two cleaners are from Bulgaria. They speak English well but do not have good written skills. The other cleaners are from the UK and
English is their first language. The employer selects the two cleaners from Bulgaria for redundancy based on their lower level of written
English.
This could be indirect discrimination. This is because it's likely to put people whose first language is not English at a disadvantage. The
employer could only justify their action if they assess people against a standard of English that's essential for the job.
Example 2 – indirect discrimination
An employer says all employees must start working some Saturdays, because they're changing their opening times. This affects
everyone who works for the organisation.
One employee is Jewish and observes the Sabbath, so they cannot work on a Saturday. They are put at a disadvantage because of
their ethnic group. If the employer cannot legally justify the change and the need for all employees to work on Saturdays, this could be
indirect discrimination.
When a decision on race might not be discrimination
In certain circumstances under the law an employer might be able to make or justify a decision based on race. Ways they can do this
include:
positive action
objective justification
an occupational requirement in recruitment
Harassment
Racial harassment is when someone experiences unwanted behaviour related to race. A common example is racist language.
To be harassment, the unwanted behaviour must have either:
violated someone's dignity
created an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment

Example of harassment directed at a specific person
Dominique, who's French, moves to a new team at work. Two people in the team regularly make fun of Dominique's accent and make
comments and jokes about being French. Dominique is very offended by this and feels humiliated.
When Dominique complains, their manager does not take it seriously and says people are only joking. Dominique feels this is not
acceptable and decides to make a formal complaint.
Example of harassment not directed at a specific person
Danny's colleagues regularly use racialised opinions and racist terms towards Turkish people. Danny is intimidated by this and feels
it's created a hostile environment for them at work.
Danny is not Turkish and the language was not directed towards them. However, they could still make a complaint of harassment
related to race because of the hostile environment they feel it's created for them at work.
When harassment can be a crime
Racial harassment can sometimes be a crime. For example if someone has experienced a race hate incident like:
physical or verbal abuse
threats of physical violence
online abuse
damage to their property
Victimisation
Victimisation is when someone is treated less favourably as a result of being involved with a discrimination or harassment complaint.
It does not matter if the complaint was made by them or someone else. The law also protects someone from victimisation if someone
else thinks they're involved with a complaint.
Ways someone can be victimised include being labelled a troublemaker, being left out, or not being allowed to do something.
Example of victimisation
Jordan raised a grievance with their employer because of ongoing racist comments and behaviour towards them that managers have
ignored. Jordan's colleague Charlie made a statement to support Jordan's complaint after witnessing some incidents.
Since then, Charlie has received aggressive emails from a manager about the witness statement. And both Jordan and Charlie have
not been invited to some important meetings they would usually be invited to. It's likely they are both being victimised.
When race discrimination might not be obvious
Discrimination is not always obvious and might not be noticed by other people. This can include:
stereotyping people – having a fixed view of what someone's like or what they can do based on their race

microaggressions – small comments, questions or behaviours that are inappropriate or can cause offence, sometimes without
the person who's doing it realising
Examples of stereotyping and microaggressions
Examples could include:
telling someone how good their English is – this suggests thinking the person would not speak good English based on how they
look or where they're from
telling someone their name is too hard to say – this implies it's not worth taking the time to learn their name and suggests they
do not fit in
3. Making and handling complaints
If someone has experienced or witnessed race discrimination at work, they can make a complaint to their employer. The employer
should take it seriously and look into it as soon as possible.
Race discrimination can be very distressing and in some cases have a severe impact on someone's mental health and wellbeing.
Employers should make sure that:
reporting race discrimination is as easy as possible
anyone who's experienced or witnessed it feels safe, protected and supported
anyone accused of race discrimination is treated in an impartial and fair way
If you've experienced race discrimination
It's best to make a complaint as soon as possible. But if you make a complaint a long time after an incident took place, your employer
should still take it seriously.
Witnessing race discrimination
If you think someone at work is being discriminated against, there are actions you can take. This could include stepping in to try and
stop it happening if you feel it's safe, supporting people or giving evidence.
Witnessing discrimination might also affect you personally. In some circumstances, you could make a harassment complaint yourself.
Handling a discrimination complaint
If you're an employer or manager, you should look into any discrimination complaint in a way that's fair and sensitive to:

the person who made the complaint
anyone who witnessed it
anyone accused of bullying or discrimination

4. Preventing race discrimination
All employers should take steps to try to make sure race discrimination does not happen at work.
As an employer, you should:
aim for a culture where everyone accepts that race discrimination is not acceptable
recognise and promote the benefits of a diverse and inclusive organisation that does not exclude anyone because of race
Steps for preventing race discrimination
Many ways to prevent discrimination apply equally to all 'protected characteristics'.
Measures that are specific to preventing race discrimination include:
talking about race
creating a race equality action plan
appointing a race champion
having race allies
setting up a staff race network
ethnicity pay gap reporting
If you're a small organisation with limited resources, there's still a lot you can do to prevent discrimination. Making your organisation
more inclusive does not have to be costly or complicated.
Talking about race
It's important to talk to your staff about appropriate language to use when discussing race. This includes when you're speaking with
individual staff members and in wider work communications.
You should make it clear that racist language is not acceptable, including things some might consider as 'banter' or jokes.
You should also be sensitive in the terms you use around race and ethnicity. Common terms include:
BAME (black, Asian and minority ethnic)
BME (black and minority ethnic)
ethnic minorities
minority ethnic
people of colour

Each of these terms can be problematic and there's no one term that everyone will prefer. Talk to your staff about how they feel about
these terms. Language and preferences can also change over time.
People can sometimes cause offence by using the 'wrong' language. If they have not done it maliciously, talking to them about what's
appropriate can sometimes be all that's needed. It's important not to excuse deliberately offensive behaviour in this way.
Where there's a genuine need to refer to race, use a specific ethnic identity where it's relevant. For example, if you're discussing issues
that specifically affect black employees make sure that's clear – broader terms like 'BAME' or 'ethnic minorities' would not be
appropriate.
Creating a race equality action plan
You may want to create a race equality action plan. This is sometimes called an anti-racism strategy.
If you have good diversity policies and practices, you might not need a dedicated race plan. But it may help if there are particular
issues in your organisation that could lead to race discrimination.
A plan should cover:
all areas of your organisation's work
what your organisation is doing to prevent racism
any aspects of your work culture or processes that are particularly problematic, and how you plan to address them
any issues that arise because of wider events, for example the covid-19 (coronavirus) pandemic
strong messages that racism, discrimination and harassment are not acceptable
how you'll use equality monitoring and data
managing languages at work, if that's relevant for your organisation – for example if a group of employees share a common
language other than English, or if there's a Welsh language requirement
You should create the plan in consultation with trade unions or other employee representatives.
Appointing a race champion
A race champion can be someone of any race who's committed to promoting equality and tackling race discrimination.
They should be:
willing and able to give time to the role
senior enough to be able to influence decision-makers and make sure actions are taken
The role could include things like:
chairing a staff race network
following developments in law and good practice
writing a blog or newsletter to promote racial equality and diversity
challenging other senior leaders to consider issues around race
raising issues that need addressing at a high level

Setting up a staff race network
A staff race network is a formal group for ethnic minority staff and their allies to:
share experiences
discuss cultural differences
support each other
raise issues that need addressing
Having race allies
Race allies are people from majority groups who want to help make sure their organisation is inclusive. They can be from any part of
an organisation, working at any level.
Race allies should:
help raise the profile of issues around race and how to address and prevent them
actively listen and try to understand people's experiences
learn about racism and use what they learn to influence others
Supporting your staff network and race roles
If you set up a staff race network or any race roles, make sure you support them. This includes:
giving people the time to be involved
actively listening to concerns raised
taking steps to resolve issues
Ethnicity pay gap reporting
The 'ethnicity pay gap' is the difference in average earnings between all ethnic groups. While it's not a legal requirement, many
organisations already report on their ethnicity pay gap. It can help to build transparency and trust.
