Understanding your pay
1. Overview
When you start work, your employer should tell you how much you’ll be paid
and how often. They should also tell you:
the day or date you’ll be paid, for example each Friday or the last day of
the month
how you’ll be paid, for example cash, cheque or bank transfer
If you’re an employee or worker (not a contractor or freelancer), you have
the right to a payslip . You can check your employment status
 if you’re not sure. Your payslip shows:
your earnings before and after any deductions
the amount of any deductions that may change each time you’re paid, for
example tax and National Insurance
the number of hours you worked, if your pay varies depending on time
worked
You might need to know how to work out your weekly pay if you have to
claim payments for redundancy or compensation from your employer.
Part-time workers
If you’re a part-time worker, you must get at least the same hourly pay rate
as a full-time worker doing a similar job.
2. Working out your pay
Knowing how to work out your weekly pay is important because it’s used to
calculate how much you should get for:
redundancy pay  and pay during
time off for job-hunting if you’re made redundant
pay during your notice period when leaving a job
holiday pay

guarantee pay for work - you get this if your employer cannot provide you
with work but your contract says they have to pay you anyway
compensation awarded by Employment Tribunals
What you’re entitled to depends on your work status .
You do not need to calculate your weekly pay if you’re paid weekly and your
pay does not vary.
If your pay varies or you’re not paid weekly, you’ll need to calculate your
weekly pay. You’ll usually use a 12-week period to work it out. For holiday
pay , use a 52-week period
instead.
The 12-week period
You can work out your weekly pay by getting an average figure for a 12week period. The particular 12 weeks you use varies depending on what
you’re calculating your pay for.
Redundancy
Use the 12 weeks up to the day you got your redundancy notice to work out
your redundancy pay .
Notice pay
Use the 12 weeks up to the first day of the notice period to work out what
your notice pay should be.
Guarantee payments
Use the 12 weeks leading up to when your payment is due. If you no longer
work for that employer, use the last 12 weeks of your employment with
them.
If you’ve worked for your employer for less than 12 weeks, you should be
allowed to calculate your average weekly pay using:
the number of hours you would have worked
the hours of other workers doing a similar job for your employer

Working out your weekly figure
Add up the total amount of pay for the period and divide it by 12 to get the
weekly figure. You do this even if you’ve had to use a period of more than
12 weeks.
Bonuses and commission
You can include bonuses and commission in your calculations
 if your
contract says your employer has to pay them.
Overtime
You can include overtime in your calculations if your contract says your
employer has to pay it.
Work done for a previous employer
You can include pay for work done for a previous employer if you’re
calculating your average weekly pay and you did not have a gap in
employment when you changed jobs.
Get help with the calculations

5. Deductions from your pay
Your employer is not allowed to make deductions unless:
it’s required or allowed by law, for example National Insurance, income
tax or student loan repayments
you agree in writing
your contract says they can
there’s a statutory payment due to a public authority
you have not worked due to taking part in a strike or industrial action
there’s been an earlier overpayment of wages or expenses

the court has told your employer to take debt payments 
A deduction cannot normally reduce your pay below the National Minimum
Wage  even if you agree to it, except if the
deduction is for:
tax or National Insurance
something you’ve done and your contract says you’re liable for it, for
example a shortfall in your till if you work in a shop
repayment of a loan or advance of wages
repayment of an accidental overpayment of wages
buying shares or share options in the business
accommodation provided by your employer 
your own use, for example union subscriptions or pension contributions
If you work in retail - for example shops, restaurants
Your employer cannot take more than 10% from your gross pay (pay before
tax and National Insurance) each pay period to cover any shortfalls.
Example
There’s a shortfall of £50 in your till and your employer wants to deduct
this from your earnings.
You’re paid £250 gross per week. Your employer can take 10% of your
gross earnings, which is £25.
They must only take £25 one week and then make another deduction
from your next pay cheque for £25.
If you leave your job, they can take the full amount owed from your final
pay.
