JUDGMENT

The unanimous judgment of the Tribunal is:

1. The complaints against the Respondent for direct race and/or age discrimination and harassment related to race and/or age contrary to ss 13 and 26 of the Equality Act 2010 (“EqA”)) as set out at paragraphs 2.2.6; 2.2.27; 3.2.6; 4.1.4 and 5.6.5 of the List of Issues set out below were dismissed upon withdrawal.

2. The remaining complaints against the Respondent of unlawful detriment on the grounds of having made a protected disclosure (contrary to s 47B of the Employment Rights Act 1996 (“ERA”)); direct race discrimination, direct age discrimination, race related harassment, age related harassment and victimisation (contrary to ss 13, 26 and 27 of the EqA are not well founded and are dismissed.

CORRECTED REASONS

The Complaints and preliminary matters

1. The Claimant presented his claim form with appended grounds of claim (pages 2-39, Pleadings and Orders Bundle) on 13 November 2023, having completed early conciliation between 29 September and 27 October 2023. The respondent defended the claim and its ET3 and grounds of resistance were shown at pages 42-91, Pleadings and Orders Bundle.

2. There was a preliminary hearing in private for case management before Employment Judge Knowles on 7 June 2024 (‘1st PH’) where particulars of the complaints the Claimant wished to bring were discussed. Employment Judge Knowles confirmed that (by consent) the claimant’s claim and the respondent’s response were amended as set out in the amended grounds of claim (pages 93-119, Pleadings and Orders Bundle) and amended grounds of resistance (pages 120-165, Pleadings and Orders Bundle). An agreed list of issues had been submitted in advance of this hearing and was updated during the hearing to include the additional issues as a result of the amended claim. The matter was listed for final hearing with a time estimate of 20 days for June 2025.

3. The matter came before Employment Judge Kight for a further preliminary hearing in private on 14 January 2025 (‘2nd PH’). At the 2nd PH Employment Judge Kight refused the Claimant’s application to amend his claim as set out in his e mail to the Tribunal of 14 October 2024. The matter came before Employment Judge Beck for a further preliminary hearing in private on 4 March 2025 (‘3rd PH’) which had been listed to deal with applications by the claimant for specific disclosure and issues raised by the Respondent around the claimant’s disclosure. It had also been listed to address issues arising from a “rule 50 application for redaction/anonymity”. Due to a national IT problem on that day causing a delay to the start of the hearing, it was not possible to deal with this. The application made by the Respondent for an anonymity order was dealt with by Employment Judge Camp on the papers, and by an order sent to the parties on 10 April 2025 this was refused.

4. The matter came before Employment Judge McCluggage for further case management on 29 April 2025 (‘4th PH’). An order for specific disclosure was made in respect of the Respondent. In addition the Respondent’s application to redact names and identifying details of whistleblowers who wished to remain anonymous was granted. Employment Judge McCluggage prepared a summary of the matters complained of without naming any whistleblower or including identifying detail which is set out at pages 229-230, Pleadings and Orders Bundle. The listing was reduced to 19 days and some timetabling was done.

5. The final list of issues agreed between the parties (‘List of Issues’) was at pages 200-210 and is set out below. This was referred to extensively during the hearing. On day 11 of the hearing, Ms Brooks confirmed that the claimant was withdrawing the allegations (brought in the alternative) of direct race/age discrimination and race/age related harassment as set out at paragraphs 2.2.27 and 4.1.4 of the List of Issues. Those complaints were accordingly dismissed upon such withdrawal.

6. An agreed bundle of documents (‘Main Bundle’) was produced for the hearing and where page numbers are referred to below, these are references to page numbers in the Main Bundle, unless otherwise specified. In addition to the Main Bundle, we had before us an additional bundle (‘Supplemental Bundle’ referred to as ‘SB’ as prefix when page numbers in that bundle are referenced) prepared by the claimant and a further bundle submitted by the respondent containing the various pleadings and orders of the Tribunal in the claim (‘Pleadings and Orders Bundle’). On day 3 of the hearing, the respondent submitted an agreed chronology, cast list, list of acronyms and reading list. At various points during the hearing additional relevant disclosure documents were produced by both parties as follows (no objection was made to any of the additional document by the opposing party):

6.1 On day 2 the claimant provided a more complete copy of the document which was shown at pages 1796 onwards of the Main Bundle. The additional pages were added as pages number 179 a, b and c and added to the Main Bundle.
6.2 On day 2 the claimant provided additional pages numbered 669-675 of the Supplemental Bundle.
6.3 On day 2, the claimant provided an accessible version of the video recording of a Teams meeting of R’s Delivery Board which took place on 19 July 2023. The Tribunal was directed to view this from a point 1 hour 42 minutes into the recording until the end, which it did in chambers at the end of a sitting day.
6.4 On day 6, the claimant provided a number of pdf documents pertaining to matters that had arisen in evidence namely a full copy of the claimant’s appraisal document, a copy of R’s grievance policy, copies of three papers produced by various organisations entitled ‘Racism remains embedded om MHS organisational culture’; ‘Beyond the snowy white peaks’ and ‘A fair experience for all NHSE’.
6.5 On day 9, the claimant provided a copy of R’s Dignity at Work Policy version 1.2 updated to 22 June 2022. This is a different version to the Dignity at Work policy in the Main Bundle at pages 2180 onwards which was version 1.0 updated to 17 May 2021. The claimant also provided a copy of a letter from his solicitors at the time, Weightmans, to the respondent’s solicitors dated 1 February 2024; a copy of an Occupational Health (‘OH’) report dated 13 February 2024; a copy of letter from Weightmans to Dr Dalton dated 3 June 2024 and a further OH report dated 28 June 2024.
6.6 On day 10, the claimant provided a further copy of the claimant’s 2018- 19 appraisal document including comments from his line manager.
6.7 On day 11, the respondent provided a copy of the transcript of the meeting held by its Local Decision-Making Group Panel (‘LDMG’) on 18 October 2023.
6.8 On day 11, the claimant provided four additional pdf documents: a copy of an e mail and attached letter from the claimant to Mr Vanes dated 1 September 2023; a copy of a document headed ‘Enforcement Undertakings’ addressed to the respondent from NHSE dated 30 January 2025; an extract from the gov.uk website entitled ‘Whistleblowing for employees’; and a document headed ‘A practical guide for responding to concerns about medical practice’ provided to those in an RO role as at March 2019.

7. The respondent undertook to prepare an updated Supplemental Bundle index and copies of suitably paginated additional documents which was submitted before the Tribunal started its deliberations. The Supplemental Bundle ran to 1030 pages once all additional documents had been included.

8. There was another bundle which contained the witness statements. The witnesses this tribunal heard from in person are set out below. The Tribunal has used the initials of various individuals as they are defined above or in the findings of fact below and replicated this in the List of Issues set out below.

9. The final hearing commenced on Monday 2 June 2025 with no parties in attendance to enable the Tribunal to do pre reading. The parties attended at 2pm on Tuesday 3 June for preliminary matters to be dealt with and the Tribunal then carried on with its reading. The evidence commenced on day 3 (Wednesday 4 June) with a further reading day without the parties taking place on day 5 (Friday 6 June) given the lengthy witness statements and extensive documents referred to.

10. During the hearing a number of matters arose that are worthy of comment. On day 7 (Tuesday 10 June) an issue arose during the cross examination by Ms Brooks of the first of the respondent’s witnesses. Mr Sutton objected to the line of questioning that was about to commence in relation to what took place at the respondent’s Delivery Board meeting on meeting on 19 July 2023 on the basis that (as raised on day 1 of the hearing in the preliminary matters discussion), the events that took place at that meeting are the subject of an ongoing internal investigation process and the Tribunal should not be straying into what occurred at the meeting. It was pointed out that the events of this meeting do not form the basis for any of the allegations of discrimination, victimisation or detriment that are before this Tribunal. Rather it is the way the respondent responded to the complaints that arose after this meeting that is the subject matter of the complaints. Ms Brooks submitted that she felt that the question as to whether the response to what happened at this meeting is appropriate cannot be looked into, unless the Tribunal also examined what happened in the meeting itself.

11. The Tribunal expressed its concern that this issue has arisen at this stage of the hearing. The recording of the meeting and transcript was adduced by the claimant and not objected to by the respondent. The Tribunal had already informed the parties that it had viewed the video recording and the transcript this had been referred to in evidence. We understand no specific objection has been raised to date.

12. The Tribunal was concerned that the questions did not stray into areas that are not for it to determine and therefore not relevant and expressed the view that it no desire to make findings of fact that are not within its remit and validly fall elsewhere. However it is important in cases of discrimination and whistleblowing that the Tribunal is permitted to hear evidence of background matters that the parties say are relevant to the rationale for decision making. This may be relevant to the issue of whether inferences can be drawn from primary facts. There is no specific reason or legal principle that requires a Tribunal not to consider matters that form the basis of an internal enquiry if this is necessary and relevant to the questions it had to determine, and this is the key. We understand the points made about embarking on the slippery slope of allowing questions. Our decision communicated to the parties orally was that some limited and specific questions could be asked by Ms Brooks on behalf of the claimant in relation to the documents and recording we have before us already in evidence. There were two caveats and those were that before each question, we needed to understand from Ms Brooks which numbered provision of the List of Issues her question pertained. Secondly, we had to be told to how the question and any answer will assist the Tribunal in determining the issues of fact and law it must decide. We acknowledged that a list of issues should not be adhered to slavishly at the expense of the core claim itself, but this List of Issues had been in place for very many months, both parties have been professionally represented throughout the proceedings and no objection has been raised as far as we are aware to the framing of the List of Issues.

13. The Tribunal also explained that it needed to consider proportionality and timing, and we needed to be clear that the questions being posed are in fact addressed to the correct witness. As we understood it, the questions related to the decision communicated to the claimant on 2 August 2023 at page 1548 that the Trust was going to commission an investigation under its FTSU policy having received concerns following the delivery board meeting both at the meeting and more generally. If a particular witness had no involvement in or influence over that particular decision, they may be unable shed any light about whether that decision was one which was lawful. The Tribunal reassured the parties that the extent to which evidence we heard is relevant was a matter for the Tribunal and if we believed it did not assist us in determining the issues, we would not make reference or rely on it.

14. The claimant’s evidence was completed by the end of day 6. Mr Sutton informed the Tribunal that he did not have any cross examination questions for the remainder of the claimant’s witnesses and would not take any point in submissions about the strength of evidence and the weight to be placed on it, if such witnesses were not called by Ms Brooks to give their evidence on oath/under affirmation. On that basis no further witnesses for the claimant attended but their witness statements were taken in evidence by the Tribunal as if they had been sworn.

15. On the morning of day 8 (Thursday 11 June), the Tribunal was informed that Ms Brooks had become unwell overnight and was unable to attend that day. The parties attended (the claimant in person) and the hearing was adjourned by agreement until the following day. On the morning of day 9, Ms Brooks handed up a list of the 10 questions she wished to ask Ms Williams pertaining to the Delivery Board meeting on 19 July 2023. Mr Sutton questioned the relevance of these questions, and objected to questions which asked the witness to comment on what she saw or heard at the meeting as the relevance of this meeting to the issues before this Tribunal was that complaints had been received by the respondent after this meeting, some of which referenced in part what occurred at the meeting. The Tribunal was content for Ms Brooks to ask questions numbered 1 to 5 and 8, but not (at least in their current form) questions 6, 7, 9 and 10. These four questions asked the witness to comment on events at the meeting itself rather than the response to complaints referencing the meeting. A more tailored question as to how much the witness was influenced by what occurred at the meeting itself when deciding how complaints should be responded to was asked and answered by the witness.

16. On day 11 (Monday 16 June) Mr Palmer was unable to attend the hearing as he had become unwell the day previously. The Tribunal informed the parties that he hoped to be well enough to attend the following day. In addition on that morning, the claimant had made a written application to amend his claim to add two additional allegations of detriment, namely:

(i) that MF colluded with others to secure complaints against the claimant such as to enable her to commence a FTSU investigation against the Claimant in August 2023.
(ii) that MF colluded with others to secure the submission of complaints to NHSE such as to achieve the removal of the claimant from his roles as RO and CMO in November 2023. The Tribunal was unable to deal with this matter in Mr Palmer’s absence so informed the parties that this application would be heard together with any objections at the start of the next day of sitting. It was suggested that the respondent may wish to provide a written response in advance. That response was provided on the morning of day 12 with the amendment strongly objected to largely on the basis that it was effectively a repeat of an amendment application refused by Employment Judge Kight in January this year (see above). The response intimated that the respondent may seek an order for costs in relation to the application. Upon asking the claimant whether the application was still pursued, and allowing some time to consider the claimant confirmed that the application to amend was being withdrawn.

17. On day 13 (Wednesday 18 June 2025) during the cross examination of GD, GD initially became upset, and a short break was taken. Just before lunch, Ms Brooks became upset during the course of her cross examination of GD and had to leave the Tribunal which led to an abrupt adjournment of the hearing. After a short break, the claimant and Mr Sutton attended before the Tribunal and the claimant asked for the hearing to be adjourned for the day to enable Ms Brooks to recover as she was feeling unwell and unable to continue that day. Mr Sutton agreed with the proposal and asked that MF be discharged from her oath today (as she was unable to attend the following day). It was suggested that no further evidence would take place that day and the parties would again look at scheduling of witnesses to ensure that evidence could be completed within the allotted time. A revised timetable was agreed and communicated to the Tribunal the following day and on the basis that the respondent was no longer intending to call two of its witnesses. The proposal had been that the evidence would be concluded by day 15 (Friday 20 June 2025).

18. Following completion of the respondent’s evidence on Friday 20 June 2025, an agreed timetable was made for the provision of submissions to the Tribunal. The parties were to prepare their written submissions and simultaneously exchange these by 5pm on Monday 23 June 2025. Oral submissions would then take place on Tuesday 24 June 2025, with the Tribunal then spending the remaining three days of the listing making its decision and preparing a reserved judgment and reasons.

19. On the morning of 23 June 2025, the Tribunal was informed that Ms Brooks had been taken unwell over the weekend and was not well enough to prepare written submissions or attend for oral submissions the following day. Ms Brooks attended her GP who advised her she was not fit to attend the hearing or do any work on the case and as such the claimant applied for the hearing to be postponed with an update to be provided the following day. The respondent confirmed that it had no objection and suggested that the matter be relisted for Thursday 26 June for oral submissions (or that written submissions only be provided in the event that Ms Brooks remained too ill to attend the Tribunal). The Tribunal ordered that the hearing be therefore postponed with an update to be provided by the following day at 4pm.

20. The claimant updated the Tribunal as ordered on 24 June 2025 and provided medical evidence on a confidential basis which indicated that Ms Brooks was not fit to engage with the Tribunal proceedings for a period of at least a month. An application to postpone the hearing for a month was made and a suggestion that rather than oral submissions, that written submissions only be provided. The Tribunal asked the respondent for its views and informed the parties that it would meet in chambers to consider the matter on Wednesday 25 June at 10am. The respondent informed the Tribunal on the morning of 25 June 2025 that it was concerned about delay to proceedings and suggested that the matter be confined to written submissions only and that these be exchanged by 25 July 2025. The claimant was asked by the Tribunal to confirm its position on the proposal and stating initially that his preference was to provide oral submissions after an 8 week period, but then confirmed in a later e mail that the preference was to proceed on the basis of written submissions only, with 8 weeks to provide these,

21. The Tribunal carefully considered the application for postponement made by the claimant and the representations made. It determined that it would not be in the interests of justice and the overriding objective to continue with the hearing that week to hear oral submissions. The claimant had provided medical evidence to support the application to postpone. On the basis of the information shown, the Tribunal had concerns about the claimant’s ability to participate in the hearing if it were to continue as originally listed. We accepted that a delay to these proceedings may cause prejudice, but to both parties equally.

22. For all of these reasons, the hearing was adjourned. However the Tribunal determined that the submissions be confined to written submissions. It was not in the interests of justice or the overriding objective to require the attendance of the parties to give submissions orally, given the circumstances set out above and the difficulties involved in finding a suitable date for attendance for the Tribunal and the parties. The Tribunal was keen to carry out its deliberations promptly but determined that these should not commence until the parties have had the opportunity to provide submissions in writing. There are very many legal complaints and issues to be determined, and the Tribunal would be assisted by understanding the relative position of the parties on each of the issues in dispute (following the completion of evidence) before it started its deliberations.

23. As submitted by the claimant, the Tribunal was content for the parties to have 8 weeks to prepare their written submissions, after which time it would meet and make its decision (to be sent to the parties as soon as practicable after this has taken place). As it was unlikely that time could be found from the list for the Tribunal to reconvene before September 2025, this 8-week timescale was unlikely to impact the timings of the ultimate decision. The Tribunal were able to find 3 days out of the list to meet to make its decision on 8, 19 and 11 September 2025.

24. The parties provided their written submissions on 20 August 2025. Both were lengthy documents with C’s submissions running to 152 pages and R’s to 56 pages. Reading such submissions, let alone analysing these and applying these to the facts found took several hours of Tribunal deliberation time. It is not practical or proportionate to summarise such lengthy documents in this judgment and reasons but rather submissions are incorporated and have been considered fully in this judgment. Where appropriate the Tribunal has made reference to specific submissions on the matters of law and fact in dispute throughout this document. Whilst the substantive decisions on the issues of fact and law in dispute were completed during this period, the written decision and reasons had not been finalised by the Judge and took several more full days of judicial time which had to be found out of the Tribunal’s list (which has been particularly heavy) between late September and November. This was an extensive exercise given the number of disclosures relied upon, detriments claimed and the complexity of some of the factual issues upon which the Tribunal needed to determine. The Tribunal apologises for the delay in the completion of the written judgment and reasons but feels it necessary to stat that it was not assisted by the volume and length of documents prepared by the parties.

The Issues

25. The issues to be determined by the Tribunal (‘the List of Issues’) were as

follows:

1. Jurisdiction

1.1 Given the date the claim form was presented and the dates of early conciliation, any complaint about something that happened before 30 June 2023 may not have been brought in time.
1.2 Whether the complaint was presented to the Tribunal before the end of the period of three months beginning when the act complained of was done or where the conduct extends over a period of time, the last of them as required by s123(1)(a) EqA; and, if not,
1.3 Whether the Tribunal should consider the complaint on the ground that it is just and equitable in all the circumstances to do so pursuant to s123(1)(b) EqA.

2. Direct Discrimination (Race and/or Age) (s13 EqA) For these purposes the Claimant identifies as white and Asian. The Claimant’s age at the relevant time was between 60 and 62 depending on the date of the event in question. The Claimant’s relevant age group being 60 – 65 years. The relevant Age Group for comparison is those below 55.

2.1 Whether the Claimant has been treated less favourably because of Race and/or Age contrary to s13 EqA.
2.2 The alleged less favourable treatment complained of is:
2.2.1 Not long listed for CEO post – October 2022
2.2.2 Delaying and/or reducing funding for the Community Transformation Program
2.2.3 The Chief Strategy Officer referred to the Community Transformation Board project as having "failed", whilst it was still in the implementation phase.
2.2.4 Failure to provide simple (paid for) estate refurbishment for a trials room for the Research and Innovation team which the Claimant led, causing loss of commercial trials and funding to support the team and the Research Strategy and demoralising the Team.
2.2.5 Refusal of repeated requests for essential administrative support
2.2.6 Undermining the Claimant’s RO role by standing down a DAW complaint against a doctor (Dr RH) without reference to him as RO.
2.2.7 Pausing the Claimant’s application for the DCEO role.
2.2.8 Raising and/or treating a complaint against the Claimant formally as a means of preventing his application for DCEO being progressed.
2.2.9 Commencing and/or considering a FTSU complaint lodged against the Claimant (rather than treating any complaint as a grievance).
2.2.10 Commencing a Maintaining High Professional Standards investigation as part of a disciplinary process against the Claimant.
2.2.11 Failing to inform the Claimant of the concerns raised by colleagues in or before August 2023 (the Claimant has not been told the exact dates or any other detail of the concerns).
2.2.12 Failing to inform the Claimant of sufficient details of the complaints made against him to NHSE, including who made the complaints such that he is able to properly answer any issues raised.
2.2.13 Removing or suspending the Claimant's duties as RO and CMO.
2.2.14 Escalating some complaints to external investigation under FTSU without attempting informal resolution.
2.2.15 Escalating the complaints to a MHPS investigation.
2.2.16 Failing to follow the Respondent's polices in respect of grievances.
2.2.17 Failing to follow the National guidance regarding complaints against Responsible Officers in respect of the Claimant.
2.2.18 Failing to follow the Respondent's and NHS FTSU policy.
2.2.19 Failing to attempt to resolve the issue informally, specifically but not limited to by using the NEDs to negotiate.
2.2.20 Failing to attempt to resolve the issue informally, specifically but not limited to by using the NEDs to negotiate.
2.2.21 Failing to follow National Guardian Office (NGO) Guidance on FSTU matters concerning Board members, in that AG is not acting in her capacity as FTSU NED Lead.
2.2.22 Appointing an individual who was not impartial to consider the Claimant's DAW complaints. The individual was the Chair's mentee, SG.
2.2.23 Appointing an individual who was not impartial to manage the complaints made against the Claimant. The individual was the Chair's mentee, SG.
2.2.24 The Chair persisting in appointing SG in relation to matters pertaining to the Claimant's employment despite the Claimant's representations that she was conflicted out and not impartial in any event.
2.2.25 The requirement that the Claimant has to report to the interim CMO, initially a cardiologist and subsequently a DCMO from another trust seconded to the interim CMO role, every week about his clinical work.
2.2.26 Failing to progress the Claimant’s DAW complaints.
2.2.27 The Respondent's CFO would shake her head in meetings in disagreement when the Claimant spoke.
2.2.28 Notifying the Claimant of “New Concerns” on 20th December 2023.
2.2.29 Setting vague, non-specific and personal Terms of Reference for the various investigations and not complying with MHPS procedure with regards to the provision of information.
2.3 For the purpose of determining this issue, the comparators for allegation
2.2.1 will be MF, QZ, KD and ME and for the other allegations will be GD and/or a hypothetical comparator occupying the same or a similar position to the Claimant and with similar qualifications and experience but who did not share his race and/or was not in his age group.
2.4 Whether the relevant circumstances of the comparator were materially different from those of the Claimant.

3. Victimisation (s27 of the EqA 2010)

3.1 Did the Claimant do a protected act within the meaning of s27(2) of the EqA? The Claimant relies on the following:
3.1.1 15 November 2022 - the Claimant raised concerns in a meeting with Chair of the Trust, JV, AW and AG, the Senior Independent Director (SID) about the CEO selection process including that a criteria of CVs not being 'too medical' was likely to be race discrimination. The Respondent accept this is a Protected Act,
3.1.2 17 August 2023 - DAW Complaint - The Respondent accept this is a Protected Act.
3.1.3 18 September 2023 - DAW Complaint - The Respondent accept this is a Protected Act.
3.2 Did the Respondent subject the Claimant to a detriment because the Claimant had done or the Respondent believed that the Claimant had done, or may do, a protected act? (EqA 2010, s 27(1)). The alleged detriments are as follows: -
3.2.1 Delaying and/or reducing funding for the Community Transformation Program;
3.2.2 In around May/June 2023 the Chief Strategy Officer referred to the Community Transformation Board project as having “failed”, whilst it was still in the implementation phase;
3.2.3 Failure to provide simple paid for estate refurbishment for a trials room for the Research and Innovation team which the Claimant leads, causing loss of commercial trails and funding to support the team and the Research Strategy and demoralising the team;
3.2.4 Refusal of requests for administrative support.
3.2.5 The CFO putting forward the recommendations in the Estates Strategy Paper in March 2023.
3.2.6 In June 2023, undermining the Claimant’s Responsible Officer (RO) role by standing down a DAW complaint against a doctor without reference to him as RO;
3.2.7 Pausing the Claimant’s application for DCEO role;
3.2.8 In or around August 2023, raising and/or treating a complaint against the Claimant formally as a means of preventing his application for DCEO being progressed;
3.2.9 FTSU complaint lodged against the Claimant, rather than treating any complaint as a grievance or attempting informal procedures first;
3.2.10 Commencing a Maintaining High Professional Standards investigation as part of a stand-alone process or a disciplinary process against the Claimant;
3.2.11 Failing to inform the Claimant of the concerns raised by colleagues in or before August 2023 (the Claimant has not been told the exact dates or any other detail of the concerns;
3.2.12 Failing to inform the Claimant of sufficient details of the complaints made against him to NHSE, including who made the complaints such that he is able to properly answer any issues raised;
3.2.13 Removing his duties as RO and CMO;
3.2.14 Requiring the Claimant to report to the Interim CMO on a weekly basis;
3.2.15 Refusal to provide the Claimant with information about the substance of a complaint and the names of the complainants who are the basis of the FTSU;
3.2.16 Escalation of complaints about the Claimant to external investigation under FTSU;
3.2.17 Failing to follow the National guidance regarding complaints against Responsible Officers;
3.2.18 Failing to follow the Respondent’s polices in respect of grievances;
3.2.19 Failing to follow the Respondent’s and NHS FTSU policy;
3.2.20 Failing to attempt to resolve the issue informally, specifically but not limited to by using the NEDs to negotiate;
3.2.21 Failing to follow National Guardian Office (NGO) Guidance on FSTU matters concerning Board members, in that AG is not acting in her capacity as FTSU NED Lead.
3.2.22 Appointing an individual who was not impartial to consider the Claimant’s DAW complaints. The individual was the Chair’s mentee, SG.
3.2.23 Appointing an individual who was not impartial to manage the complainants made against the Claimant. The individual was the Chair’s mentee, SG.
3.2.24 The Chair persisting in appointing SG in relation to matters pertaining to the Claimant’s employment despite the Claimant’s representations that she was conflicted out and not impartial in any event;
3.2.25 Failing to progress the Claimant’s DAW complaints;
3.2.26 Notifying the Claimant of “New Concerns.”
3.2.27 Setting vague, non-specific and personal Terms of Reference for the various investigations and not complying with MHPS procedure with regards to the provision of information.
3.3 All of the above, save for paragraph 3.2.19 were because of the first act set out at paragraph 3.1.1.
3.4 The acts set out in paragraphs 3.2.11 to 3.2.18 were because of the second act set out at paragraph 3.1.2.
3.5 The acts set out in paragraphs 3.2.22 to 3.2.25 were because of the second and third acts set out in paragraphs 3.1.2 and 3.1.3.

4. Harassment (Age/Race) (s26 EqA)

4.1 Did the Respondent:
4.1.1 Chair persisting in appointing SG in relation to matters pertaining to the Claimant's employment despite the Claimant's representations that she was conflicted out and not impartial in any event.
4.1.2 that the Claimant has to report to the interim CMO, initially a cardiologist and subsequently a DCMO from another trust seconded to the interim CMO role, every week about his clinical work.
4.1.3 CFO email to say that a former MD she knew could come and assist the Trust with its out of hours cover work (which was part of the Claimant's team responsibilities)
4.1.4 CFO would shake her head in meetings in disagreement when the Claimant spoke
4.2 Was this unwanted conduct?
4.3 Was it related to the Claimant’s Race and/or Age?
4.4 Whether, having regard to all the circumstances, including the perception of the Claimant, it is reasonable for the conduct to have the effect of violating the Claimant's dignity or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for him.

5. Whistleblowing (s47B(1) ERA)

5.1 Whether the complaint was presented to the Tribunal before the end of the period of three months beginning when the act complained of was done or, where that act or failure is part of a series of similar acts or failures, the last of them as required by (s48(3)(a) ERA); and, if not,
5.2 Whether the Tribunal is satisfied that it was not reasonably practicable for the Claimant to present the complaint before the end of that three-month period; and, if so
5.3 Whether the complaint was presented to the Tribunal within such further period as the Tribunal considers reasonable.
5.4 Do any of the following amount to qualifying disclosures of information to the Respondent which, in the reasonable belief of the Claimant, tended to show that malpractice, wrongdoing or failure the Claimant disclosed was taking place or was likely to take place under s43B(1)(b)(d) and/or (f) ERA.
5.4.1 27 April 2022- The Claimant raised the issue of procedural unfairness with the acting CEO, MF, concerning the process followed in appointing the Deputy COO.
5.4.2 31 October 2022 - The Claimant wrote to CPO, AW, expressing his concerns about not having been long listed on the basis of discrimination on the grounds of race.
5.4.3 13 November 2022 - The Claimant wrote to AW reiterating his concerns regarding the long listing process for the CEO role.
5.4.4 15 November 2022 - the Claimant raised concerns in a meeting with Chair of the Trust, JV, AW and AG, the Senior Independent Director (SID) about the CEO selection process including that a criteria of CVs not being 'too medical' was likely to be race discrimination.
5.4.5 8 January 2023 - the Claimant wrote to AW expressing his dissatisfaction with the review of the CEO process that had taken place and concerns regarding the management of the Trust.
5.4.6 16 January 2023 - the Claimant wrote to AG the Senior Independent Director of the Respondent expressing concern as to how an allegation of abuse and substandard patient care was dealt with by the Trust.
5.4.7 19 July 2023 - the Claimant emailed the CEO expressing his concern that there may be a closed culture in the Trust's governance.
5.4.8 26 July 2023 - the Claimant raised concerns at a Board meeting about the impact on very vulnerable patients of a proposal to close the Gerry Simon Clinic.
5.4.9 17 August 2023 – DAW complaint.
5.4.10 18 September 2023 – DAW complaint.
5.5 Did the Claimant have reasonable belief that his disclosures were made in the public interest and tended to show that the malpractice, wrongdoing or failure the Claimant disclosed was taking place or was likely to take place and/or had been, was being or was likely to be deliberately concealed?
5.6 Has the Claimant been subjected to any detriment by any act or deliberate failure to act by the Respondent on the ground that the Claimant had made a protected disclosure pursuant to s47B ERA 1996? Specifically, has the Claimant suffered any of the detriments below because of any of the above disclosures:
5.6.1 Delaying and/or reducing funding for the Community Transformation Program;
5.6.2 In around May/June the Chief Strategy Officer referred to the Community Transformation Board project as having “failed”, whilst it was still in the implementation phase.
5.6.3 Failure to provide simple (paid for) estate refurbishment for a trials room for the Research and Innovation team which the Claimant led, causing loss of commercial trails and funding to support the team and the Research Strategy and demoralising the team;
5.6.4 Refusal of repeated requests for essential administrative support - These occurred (5.6.1 to 5.6.4) because of the first and fourth protected disclosures.
5.6.5 In June 2023, undermining the Claimant’s Responsible Officer (RO) role by standing down a DAW complaint against a doctor without reference to him as RO - This was because of the fourth protected disclosure.
5.6.6 Pausing the Claimant’s application for DCEO role - This was because of the first, fourth, seventh and eighth protected disclosures.
5.6.7 In or around August 2023, raising and/or treating a complaint against the Claimant formally as a means of preventing his application for DCEO being progressed - This was because of the first, fourth, seventh and eighth protected disclosures.
5.6.8 Commencing and/or considering a FTSU complaint lodged against the Claimant (rather than treating any complaint as a grievance); This was because of the first, fourth, seventh and eighth protected disclosures.
5.6.9 Commencing a Maintaining High Professional Standards investigation as part of a disciplinary process against the Claimant; This was because of the ninth protected disclosure.
5.6.10 Failing to inform the Claimant of the concerns raised by colleagues in or before August 2023 (the Claimant has not been told the exact dates or any other detail of the concerns) - This was because of the first, fourth, seventh and eighth protected disclosures.
5.6.11 Failing to inform the Claimant of sufficient details of the complaints made against him to NHSE, including who made the complaints such that he is able to properly answer any issues raised; This was because of the ninth protected disclosure.
5.6.12 Removing or suspending the Claimant’s duties as RO and CMO; This was because of the ninth protected disclosure.
5.6.13 Refusing to provide the Claimant with information about the substance of a complaint and the names of the complainants who are the basis of the FTSU or MHPS investigation; This was because of the first, fourth, seventh and eighth protected disclosures.
5.6.14 Escalating some complaints to external investigation under FTSU without attempting informal resolution; This was because of the first, fourth, seventh and eighth protected disclosures.
5.6.15 Escalating the complaints to a MHPS investigation; This was because of the ninth protected disclosure.
5.6.16 Failing to follow the Respondent’s polices in respect of grievances; This was because of the first, fourth, seventh and eighth protected disclosures.
5.6.17 Failing to follow the National guidance regarding complaints against Responsible Officers in respect of the Claimant; This was because of the ninth protected disclosure.
5.6.18 Failing to follow the Respondent’s and NHS FTSU policy; This was because of the first, fourth, seventh and eighth protected disclosures.
5.6.19 Failing to attempt to resolve the issue informally, specifically but not limited to by using the NEDs to negotiate; This was because of the first, fourth, seventh and eighth protected disclosures.
5.6.20 Failing to follow National Guardian Office (NGO) Guidance on FSTU matters concerning Board members, in that AG is not acting in her capacity as FTSU NED Lead; This was because of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth protected disclosures.
5.6.21 Appointing an individual who was not impartial to consider the Claimant’s DAW complaints. The individual was the Chair’s mentee, SG This was because of the second, third, fourth and fifth protected disclosures.
5.6.22 Appointing an individual who was not impartial to manage the complainants made against the Claimant. The individual was the Chair’s mentee, SG. This was because of the second, third, fourth and fifth protected disclosures.
5.6.23 The Chair persisting in appointing SG in relation to matters pertaining to the Claimant’s employment despite the Claimant’s representations that she was conflicted out and not impartial in any event; This was because of the second, third, fourth fifth and tenth protected disclosures.
5.6.24 The requirement that the Claimant has to report to the interim CMO, initially a cardiologist and subsequently a DCMO from another trust seconded to the interim CMO role, every week about his clinical work; This was because of the ninth protected disclosure.
5.6.25 Failing to progress the Claimant’s DAW complaints. This was because of the ninth and tenth protected disclosures.
5.6.26 Commencing an MHPS investigation This was because of the ninth protected disclosure.
5.6.27 Notifying the Claimant of “New Concerns” on 20th December 2023.
5.6.28 Setting vague, non-specific and personal Terms of Reference for the various investigations and not complying with MHPS procedure with regards to the provision of information. These (5.27 and 5.28) occurred because of the ninth protected disclosure.
5.7 Did the Claimant make the disclosures in good faith? If not, does the Tribunal consider it just and equitable to reduce any award it makes to the Claimant by no more than 25% in accordance with s18(4)/(5) of ERRA 2013.

6. Remedy

6.1 What, if any, financial loss has the Claimant suffered?
6.2 What, if any, award for level of Injury to Feelings is the Claimant entitled to?
6.3 What amount of interest is the Claimant entitled to? Findings of Fact Witnesses and other individuals

26. The following people attended to give evidence on behalf of the claimant:

26.1 The Claimant (‘C’).

27. The claimant also admitted written statements from:

27.1 Dr S Abilash (‘SA’) – Deputy Chief Medical Officer (‘DCMO’)
27.2 Dr V Kennedy (‘AN’) – Associate Medical Director (‘AMD’)
27.3 Dr V Kohli (‘VK’) – Speciality Doctor/Acting Consultant
27.4 Dr A Narula (‘AN’) – Director of Medical Education & Head of School
27.5 Mr R Shipley (‘RS’) – Retired Health and Safety Director at Balfour Beatty, who attended R Board meetings following involvement with R’s Suicide Prevention Group
27.6 Dr A Yahia (‘AY’) – Older Adult Consultant
27.7 Mr Q Zada (‘QZ’) – Candidate for CEO post

28. The following people attended to give evidence on behalf of the respondent:

28.1 Mr M Axcell (‘MA’), Chief Executive Officer (‘CEO’) until November 2021
28.2 Mrs G Dean (‘GD’), Chief Financial Officer (‘CFO’)
28.3 Mrs M Foster (‘MF’), Acting CEO since December 2021, Substantive CEO since January 2023
28.4 Ms S Gondal (‘SG’), Non-Executive Director (‘NED’)
28.5 Ms K Kaur-Wilson (‘KKW’), Chief Strategy and Partnership Officer and Deputy CEO
28.6 Mr J Vanes (‘JV’), Chair until November 2024
28.7 Mrs A Williams (‘AW’), Chief People Officer (‘CPO’)

29. The respondent also admitted written statements from:

29.1 Mr R Dunshea (‘RD’), NED;
29.2 Ms A Geeson (‘AG’), NED; and
29.3 Ms J Jeffrey (‘JJ’), NED and Vice Chair until November 2024;

30. The following individuals were referred to during the evidence:

30.1 Mr S Ali (‘SA’), NED
30.2 Ms E Allen (‘EA’), PPA Adviser
30.3 Ms S Anward (‘SAn’), NHSE
30.4 Mr M Axcell (‘MA’), Chief Executive Officer (‘CEO’) until November 2021
30.5 Ms J Bailey (‘JB’), NED
30.6 Ms E Barnes (‘EB’), HR Business Partner
30.7 Ms K Boffey (‘KB’), NHSE
30.8 Dr B Chawda (‘BC’), AMD
30.9 Mr P Chamberlain (‘PC’), Head of Financial Planning
30.10 Mr I Crich (‘IC’), HR Consultant and Reviewer in the Independent review commissioned into CEO recruitment process.
30.11 Dr D Dalton (‘DD’), Consultant Psychiatrist at Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust, Case Manager of the MHPS investigation
30.12 Mrs G Dean (‘GD’), Chief Financial Officer (‘CFO’)
30.13 Mr N Dunaway (‘ND’), R’s Chief Information Officer (‘CIO’)
30.14 Mr W Farah (‘WF’), NHS Confederation co-ordinator of the national BME Leadership Network
30.15 Ms R Farmer (‘RF’), NHSE
30.16 Mrs M Foster (‘MF’), Acting CEO since December 2021, Substantive CEO since January 2023
30.17 Mr P Gayle (‘PG’), Chair since December 2024
30.18 Dr K Gingell (‘KG’), Joint Medical Director 2012-18
30.19 Mr K Girling (‘KGi’), Responsible Officer, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust and member of LDMG
30.20 Ms S Gondal (‘SG’), Non-Executive Director (‘NED’)
30.21 Ms A Geeson (‘AG’), NED
30.22 Dr R Hanabe (‘RH’), Clinical Director (Walsall)
30.23 Mr J Heys (‘JH’), NHSE lay member and member of LDMG.
30.24 Dr J Hobbs (‘JHo’), Interim CMO
30.25 Ms R Ishaq (‘RI’), solicitor & Reviewer in the Independent review commissioned into CEO recruitment process.
30.26 Mr N Jamshed (‘NJ’), NED
30.27 Ms K Kaur-Wilson (‘KKW’), Chief Strategy and Partnership Officer and Deputy CEO
30.28 Dr L McGowan (‘LMcG’), Chief Clinical Information Officer (‘CCIO’)
30.29 Mr C Masikane (‘CM’), Chief Operating Officer and Deputy CEO to 2024
30.30 Ms S Mason (‘SM’), Medical Directorate Manager
30.31 Mr D Moon (‘DM’), NED
30.32 Ms G Nic Philib (‘GNP’), Chief People Officer, George Eliot Hospital NHS Trust & SWFT NHS FT and member of LDMG
30.33 Ms F Okwu (‘FO’), Head of Research and Innovation
30.34 Ms B Pattani (‘BP’), NHSE
30.35 Mr D Pandaal (‘DP’), Associate Director of Performance, Improvement and Planning
30.36 Ms E Pickup (‘EP’), Recruitment Consultant at Gatenby Sanderson (‘GS’)
30.37 Mr J Petty (‘JP’), Associate Director of Governance and Quality
30.38 Dr M Rao (‘MR’), current Interim CMO
30.39 Ms S Roberts (‘SR’), Chief Nursing Officer, Black Country ICB and member of LDMG
30.40 Ms L Saddler (‘LS’), NHSE
30.41 Mr A Shaw (‘AS’), Head of Programme Management and Commercial Support
30.42 Mr R Shipley (‘RS’), Governor
30.43 Dr J Sokolov (‘JS’), Medical Director, Higher Level Responsible Officer

(“HLRO”)

30.44 Dr J Srinivas (‘JSr’), Interim CMO
30.45 Ms K Smith (‘KS’), Company Secretary
30.46 Mrs A Williams (‘AW’), Chief People Officer (‘CPO’)
30.47 Mr J Vanes (‘JV’), Chair until November 2024
30.48 Ms J Veale (‘JVe’), Deputy Chief Strategy Officer (‘DCSO’)

31. The evidence contained continual use of acronyms and so for ease of reference the following glossary defines the terms that were used in the evidence:

31.1 ‘AMD’ - Associate Medical Director;
31.2 ‘AOG’ - Assembly of Governors;
31.3 ‘BCPNFT’ - Black Country Partnership NHS Foundation Trust
31.4 ‘‘CCG’ - Clinical Commissioning Group;
31.5 ‘CMHT’ - Community Mental Health Trust;
31.6 ‘CMO’ – Chief Medical Officer;
31.7 ‘CMT’ - Corporate Management Team;
31.8 ‘CNO’ - Chief Nursing Officer;
31.9 ‘COO’ - Chief Operating Officer;
31.10 ‘CFO’ - Chief Finance Officer;
31.11 ‘CSO’ - Chief Strategy Officer;
31.12 ‘DAW’ - Dignity at Work;
31.13 ‘DB’ - Delivery Board;
31.14 ‘DCOO’ - Deputy Chief Operating Officer;
31.15 ‘DMD’ - Divisional Medical Director;
31.16 ‘DWMHPT’ - Dudley and Walsall Mental Health Partnership NHS Trust;
31.17 ‘FTSU’ - Freedom to Speak Up;
31.18 ‘HLRO’ - Higher Level Responsible Officer;
31.19 ‘ICB’ - Integrated Care Board;
31.20 ‘ICS’ - Integrated Care System;
31.21 ‘JCE’ - Joint Clinical Executive;
31.22 ‘LDMG’ - Local Decision-Making Group;
31.23 ‘MAC’ - Medical Advisory Committee;
31.24 ‘MD’ - Medical Director;
31.25 ‘MDM’ - Medical Directorate Manager;
31.26 ‘MDT’ - Multi-Disciplinary Team;
31.27 ‘MEC’ - Medical Executive Committee;
31.28 ‘MEG’ - Lead Provider Management Executive;
31.29 ‘MHPS’ - Maintaining High Professional Standards in the Modern NHS;
31.30 ‘NED’ - Non-Executive Director;
31.31 ‘NHSE’ - NHS England;
31.32 ‘NHSEI’ - NHS England and NHS Improvement;
31.33 ‘OOH’ - Out of Hours;
31.34 ‘PCN’ - Primary Care Network;
31.35 ‘PPA’ - Practitioner Performance Advice (formally NCAS);
31.36 ‘RO’ - Responsible Officer;
31.37 ‘SI’ - Serious Incident;
31.38 ‘SID’ - Senior Independent Director;
31.39 ‘SFI’ - Standing Financial Instructions;
31.40 ‘SRO’ - Senior Responsible Owner;
31.41 ‘STP’ - Sustainability and Transformation Partnership;
31.42 ‘WRES’ - Workforce Race Equality Standard Credibility

32. We found all those witnesses who gave evidence before us to be truthful, and we did not believe that anyone was setting out to deliberately mislead the Tribunal. R’s witnesses gave clear and credible evidence and for the very large part, much of what they said was supported by contemporaneous documents in the form of the very many e mails that we were directed to read in pre reading and in cross examination. Those witnesses were measured and willing to make concessions stating where they felt that things could have been handled better.

33. C’s evidence was extremely detailed, and we were satisfied that C genuinely believed that had had been subject to detrimental treatment because of his race and because he had made complaints of discrimination. The Tribunal were less satisfied that C held a genuine belief that any of the actions of the respondent were connected to his age. This was only briefly touched upon in the written witness statements and age was not mentioned at all during the many days of cross examination. Similarly C did not particularly dwell on any connection between the detrimental treatment he relied upon any the protected disclosures he says he made. C and his representative were reminded several times during the hearing that the Tribunal had to not only find that detrimental treatment had occurred but that this was because of the relevant protected characteristic/protected act/protected disclosure. We found that C was a credible witness with a good recall of the facts but his view of the rationale and reasoning of others for decisions being made became clouded by his strongly held opinions about how R should be led and managed and as events unfolded his shock and distress at his own treatment by the respondent which he believed to be grossly unfair and unjustified.

34. We considered the evidence given both in written statements and oral evidence given in cross examination, re-examination and in answer to questioning from the Tribunal. We considered the ET1 and the ET3 together with relevant numbered documents referred to below that were pointed out to us in the Main Bundle and the Supplemental Bundle.

35. To determine the issues set out above, it was not necessary to make detailed findings on all the matters heard in evidence. We have made findings though not only on allegations made as specific complaints but on other relevant matters raised as background. These findings may have been relevant to drawing inferences and conclusions. We made the following findings of fact:

35.1 C is of mixed White/Asian heritage and his age at the relevant time was between 60 and 62 and his age group for the purposes of these proceedings is 60 – 65 years (the relevant age group for comparison is those below 55). He is a consultant psychiatrist and has been employed by R as CMO and RO for Medical Appraisal and Revalidation since 1 April 2020. He was formerly (continuously) employed as a consultant psychiatrist by the DWMHPT from 2004 and was Joint MD there from 2012.
35.2 R was formed as a result of the merger between the DWMHPT and the BCPNFT. It provides mental health services, learning disability and autism services in the Black Country which is subdivided into four localities, Dudley, Walsall, Sandwell and Wolverhampton. Relevant policies
35.3 We were referred various policies and procedures of relevance to the issues in dispute throughout the hearing. R FTSU Policy
35.4 R’s FTSU Policy was set out at pages 2205 to 2227. This policy was also referred to at times in the correspondence we saw as the ‘Raising Concerns Policy’ which was its previous title. This was R’s local policy in place at the time and is expressed as being applicable across R and should be read in conjunction with R’s Disciplinary Procedure, Grievance Policy, Bullying and Harassment Policy and the National FTSU Policy. Our attention was drawn to the following relevant provisions: “5. Process / Procedure
5.1 What Concerns Can I Speak Up About? You can and should Speak Up about anything that is concerning you. Just a few examples of this might include (but are by no means restricted to) o Risk o Malpractice o Patient harm/safety/experience o Wrongdoing, fraud or illegality o Poor cultures, attitudes and behaviours of individuals, teams or the wider organisation o Bullying, harassing, being abusive or victimising o Failure to uphold Trust values o Unsafe working conditions o Inadequate induction or training for staff o Lack of, or poor, responses to feedback around reported patient safety incidents. …..
5.2 Grievances The Speak Up Policy is not specifically designed to address individual or personal concerns and grievances, where the issue only relates to that individual’s own employment and the concern only affects them. That type of concern should still be raised and addressed but is better suited to our Grievance Policy. However, in those situations you should not suffer in silence and should still “Speak Up” to “someone”, be that a manager, HR, Trade Union etc. to get advice, sign posting and support to make sure the matter is addressed. If you don’t feel able to raise the issue via any of those routes for any reason then please do contact your FTSU Guardians who will be able to advise and support you in confidence on the best course of action. …….
5.4 Open, Confidential and Anonymous Speaking Up Open - You Speak Up to someone, be that your manager, HR or a FTSU Guardian, and are happy for people to know where it came from. Confidential - We hope you will feel comfortable raising your concern openly, but we also appreciate that you may want to raise it confidentially. This means that while you are willing for your identity to be known to the person you raise your concern to, you do not want anyone else to know your identity. Therefore, we will keep your identity confidential, if that is what you want, unless required to disclose it by law (for example, by the police). Anonymous - You may choose to raise your concern anonymously, without giving anyone your name that does however make it much harder to investigate thoroughly and provide feedback on the outcome. Using the FTSU Portal on the Trust intranet does enable you to have real time anonymous text chat conversations with a FTSU Guardian, you can use a pseudonym to protect your identity which cannot be linked to your email etc. This has the advantage of allowing a dialogue where your FTSU Guardians are able to get all the information they need to action your concern, support, advise and provide feedback; so we would encourage this option if you wish to remain anonymous. ….
5.6 Whom Should I Speak Up To? Guardians do not need to be involved in raising concerns but we can be called upon at any point in the process to advise, support, sign-post and ensure things are moving. Our aim is to create a culture where Speaking Up is business as usual, not something to be anxious about or agonise over. There are a variety of routes for staff to raise concerns internally within the Trust which are detailed here:

1. In most cases the easiest way to get your concern resolved will be to raise it informally, or formally, with your immediate line manager (or lead clinician or tutor). They should be happy to hear what the problem is and willing to support you, as very often they are in a position to quickly and simply resolve the matters. However, if you’re scared to do that, or if you have spoken to them and they’ve done nothing or not fed back to you, or indeed if they are part of the problem, you can use any of the options set out below and remember at any point you can seek advice from your FTSU Guardians.

2. You can escalate to your immediate manager’s line manager, or other more senior manager or leader within the service.

3. You can also escalate to senior leaders within the Trust, e.g. Service line leads, Divisional Leads, Board member, Directors or Execs.

4. You can also contact HR or the Director of People

5. Trade Union members can contact their Trade Union directly, staff who are not members of a Trade Union, will not be eligible for representation but can contact a staff side lead for advice and support. * See below

6. You can contact the CEO, Chair or Non-Executive Director with responsibility for Freedom to Speak Up.

7. The Compliance and Safety Team

8. For clinical or medical staff your respective professional bodies e.g. RCN, NMC etc.

9. Safeguarding team / via Incident Reporting.

10. Fraud Team

11. Freedom to Speak Up Guardians – at any point in the process for advice, sign-posting, guidance and help ….

5.10 Example Process for Speaking Up Internally Example process for raising and escalating a concern
5.10.1 Step One If you have a concern about a risk, malpractice or wrongdoing at work, we hope you will feel able to raise it first with your line manager, lead clinician, tutor (for students), HR, Trade Union. This may be done orally or in writing. It is nearly always better, quicker and less stressful to flag a concern as soon as possible with your most immediate line manager if possible.
5.10.2 Step Two If you feel unable to raise the matter through those channels, or have tried to and not received a response, or if you just want to have a confidential chat to discuss options then please raise the matter with your Trust Freedom to Speak Up Guardians: Your Guardians have been given special responsibility and training in dealing with Speaking Up concerns. They will: o Treat your concern confidentially unless otherwise agreed. o Agree a course of action with you that you are happy with. o Escalate in an agreed manner based on the conversation to an appropriate person within the organisation or if necessary outside of the Trust. o Ensure you receive timely updates or feedback on your concern. o Protect you from being subjected to detriment for raising your concern o Ensure you have access to personal support since raising your concern may be stressful. On receipt, the concern will be recorded and you will receive an acknowledgement usually within two working days. Guardians keep a confidential central record and will record the date the concern was received, whether you have requested confidentiality, a summary of the concerns and agreed escalation, dates when you have been given updates or feedback and when the concern was closed.
5.10.3 Step Three If these channels have been followed and you still have concerns, or if you feel that the matter is so serious that you cannot discuss it with any of the above, including your Guardians, please contact any of the following (details will be available via the intranet) o Chief Executive Officer o Medical Director o Director of People o Director of Nursing o Non-Executive Lead with responsibility for Freedom To Speak Up o Chair
5.10.4 Step Four You can raise concerns formally with external bodies as a so called “whistleblowing event”, generally unless there are exceptional circumstances raising a concern externally should only be undertaken once internal options have been exhausted.
5.11 Speaking Up Externally
5.11.1 Disclosure of Concerns to External Bodies Some staff may feel they are unable to raise a concern by any of the internal methods previously listed or despite their best efforts their concern has not been satisfactorily resolved internally, they may choose to raise their concern externally as a Whistle Blowing incident. If for any reason you do not feel comfortable raising your concern internally, you can raise concerns with external bodies listed below:  NHS England & NHS Improvement for concerns about: o How NHS trusts and foundation trusts are being run o Other providers with an NHS provider licence o NHS procurement, choice and competition o The national tariff o Primary medical services (general practice) o Primary dental services o Primary ophthalmic services o Local pharmaceutical services …….
5.12 Investigations Very often Speaking Up will not result in an investigation, in most cases the issue(s) can be dealt with quickly and easily and a resolution reached that suits all parties; in fact we want to normalise the culture of Speaking Up such that matters are routinely addressed as they arise and are not allowed to fester and get bigger. However, this will not always be the case and where it has been impossible to resolve the matter quickly with your line manager, it may be necessary to carry out proportionate investigation, a process which may involve HR. Investigations should involve someone suitably independent, within whom all parties can agree on (usually from a different part of the organisation) and properly trained who can reach a conclusion within a reasonable timescale. Wherever possible the Trust will carry out a single investigation (so, for example, where a concern is raised about a patient safety incident, we will usually undertake a single investigation that looks at your concern and the wider circumstances of the incident. The investigation will be objective and evidence-based and will produce a report that focuses on identifying and rectifying any issues, and learning lessons to prevent problems recurring. The Trust may decide that your concern would be better looked at under another process; for example, our process for dealing with bullying and harassment etc. Guardians themselves do not undertake investigations, and may not even have been notified of this process unless the concerns was escalated via them. However, if the person speaking up is unhappy with the setup of the investigation, or does not trust that it is being undertaken properly or in a timely manner, you may contact the Guardians for support and advice.” NHS National FTSU Policy
35.5 As well as R’s local policy, there is a national FTSU policy which appears on R’s intranet and was shown at pages 2684-2694. Our attention was drawn to the following relevant provisions of that document: “What will we do? The matter you are speaking up about may be best considered under a specific existing policy/process; for example, our process for dealing with bullying and harassment. If so, we will discuss that with you. If you speak up about something that does not fall into an HR or patient safety incident process, this policy ensures that the matter is still addressed. What you can expect to happen after speaking up is shown in Appendix A. Resolution and investigation We support our managers/supervisors to listen to the issue you raise and take action to resolve it wherever possible. In most cases, it’s important that this opportunity is fully explored, which may be with facilitated conversations and/or mediation. Where an investigation is needed, this will be objective and conducted by someone who is suitably independent (this might be someone outside your organisation or from a different part of the organisation) and trained in investigations. It will reach a conclusion within a reasonable timescale (which we will notify you of), and a report will be produced that identifies any issues to prevent problems recurring. Any employment issues that have implications for you/your capability or conduct identified during the investigation will be considered separately. ….. Appendix A: Escalation: If resolution has not What will happen when I speak up? been achieved, or you are not satisfied with Steps towards Outcomes: the outcome, you can We will: resolution: The outcomes escalate the matter to Thank you for speaking Engagement with will be shared the senior lead for up relevant senior with you FTSU or the non- Help you identify the managers (where wherever executive lead for options for resolution appropriate) possible, along FTSU (if you are in an Signpost you to health Referral to HR with learning and NHS trust) and wellbeing support process (where improvement Alternatively, if you Confirm what appropriate) identified think there are good information you have Referral to patient reasons not to use provided consent to safety internal routes, speak share process(where up to an external Support you with any appropriate) body, such as the further next steps and Other type of CQC or NHS England keep in touch with you appropriate investigation, mediation, etc. Supplementary information on Freedom to Speak Up in NHS trusts and NHS Foundation Trusts
35.6 C referred us to this document which was dated July 2019 (pages SB451-71). It was published by NHSE and NHSEI together with the National Guardian’s Office and is stated as accompanying two other documents (which we were not specifically taken to) titled Guidance for boards on Freedom to Speak Up in NHS trusts published by NHSI and the National Guardian’s Office (shown at pages SB439-50) and NHS foundation trusts and the Freedom to Speak Up review tool for NHS trust and foundation trusts. It set out descriptions of the individual responsibilities of board members in relation to FTSU, specifically mentioning the role of the CEO and Chair; the Executive Lead for FTSU, the Non-executive lead for FTSU; Human resource and organisational development directors, and the Medical director and director of nursing. We were referred specifically to the section on the responsibilities of the non-executive lead, as follows: “The non -executive lead is responsible for:

• role-modelling high standards of conduct around FTSU
• ensuring they are aware of the latest guidance from National Guardian's Office
• challenging the chief executive, executive lead for FTSU and the board to reflect on whether they could do more to create a healthy and effective speaking up culture
• acting as an alternative source of advice and support for the FTSU Guardian
• overseeing speaking up matters regarding board members ~ see below. We appreciate it can be challenging to maintain confidentiality and objectivity when investigating issues raised about board members. This is why the role of the designated non-executive lead is critical. Therefore, in exceptional circumstances, we would expect the non-executive lead to take the lead in determining whether:
• sufficient attempts have been made to resolve a speaking up concern involving a board member(s) and
• if so, whether an appropriate fair and impartial investigation can be conducted, is proportionate, and what the terms of reference should be for escalating matters to regulators, as appropriate. Depending on the circumstances, it may be appropriate for the non- executive lead to oversee the investigation and take on the responsibility of updating the worker. Wherever the non-executive lead does take the lead, they inform the FTSU Guardian, confidential, of the case; keep them informed of progress; and seek their advice around process and record - keeping.” DAW Policy

35.7 R’s DAW (Preventing Bullying and Harassment) Policy was shown at pages 2180- SB 767-794). Of particular note were the following provisions: “1. Introduction The Trust is committed to the welfare of its workforce supported in part by creating a Caring First Culture of openness in which the dignity of individuals is respected. The Trust also recognises that employees may wish to raise concerns about their treatment or that of their work colleagues. All employees are encouraged to raise concerns about bullying, harassment or victimisation as soon as they arise to increase the likelihood of an effective informal resolution. ….. ‘1.1 Policy Principles Wherever possible, via the support mechanisms outlined in the policy, bullying and harassment complaints will be raised initially with the person(s) involved to alert them to the impact of their behaviours. In the event that this does not resolve the issues, or the individual feels unable to address the person directly then matters should be raised with the employee’s direct line manager a Work Place Advisor or their Trade Union Representative. It is envisaged that the majority of complaints will be resolved via informal discussion between the employee, their line manager and the person(s) involved. If the informal process does not resolve the concern or the concern is of a very serious or of a persistent nature, there is a formal procedure to follow whereby employees are required to put their concern in writing. This is a confidential process designed to deal with the employee’s concerns in a prompt, fair, consistent and transparent way. While the process is confidential is should be noted it is not anonymous. Further clarity on how confidentiality is managed can be found in the sections below. and ‘5.16 The Rights of the Subject of the Complaint A member of staff who is the subject of a complaint will always be advised of the nature of the complaint and have the opportunity to respond, before any formal decision that may affect their future is taken. The actual timing of the notification may vary, for example if the complainant is considering which option they may wish to pursue as part of the informal options for resolution being advised by a third party at this point may limit the opportunity to resolve the matter informally. A member of staff who is subject of any form of investigation undertaken into a matter will be advised at the earliest opportunity. For the avoidance of doubt that is prior to commencement of that investigation.’ Stage 1 – Informal Options for Resolution If employees have a complaint of bullying or harassment, they are required to raise the matter as soon as is reasonably practical with their direct line manager. If the line manager is directly involved in the matter concerned, staff are required to raise the concern with the next level of manager in the first instance. This may be done verbally or in writing. This will normally be within 4 weeks of an incident occurring. Employees should state that they are raising a concern under the Dignity at Work – Bullying and Harassment Policy. The policy lists and describes a number of different options open to an employee stating it is for them to decide the best course of action to take. The examples are raising the matter directly, seeking mediation, seeking support of their line manager, getting advice from a trade union or HR or holding an informal meeting. It does on to describe Stage 2 being a Formal Procedure “where it has not been possible to resolve the concern informally”. Stage 3 set out the right of appeal. MHPS Policy
35.8 The MHPS policy, which was titled the ‘Disciplinary and Performance Management of Medical Practitioners Policy’ was included at pages 2228 to 2265. This was a lengthy disciplinary procedure which applied to medical staff within R and implemented the national NHS framework to manage concerns about conduct, capability and health matters. We were referred to the following provisions in evidence and submissions: “4.1.1 When serious concerns are raised about a medical practitioner, the Trust will urgently consider whether it is necessary to place temporary restrictions on their practice. This might be to amend or restrict their clinical duties, obtain undertakings or provide for the exclusion of the practitioner from the workplace, details of which are contained within this policy. …
4.1.3 When serious concerns are raised about a medical practitioner, the Trust will urgently consider whether it is necessary to place temporary restrictions on their practice. This might be to amend or restrict their clinical duties, obtain undertakings or provide for the exclusion of the practitioner from the workplace, details of which are contained within this policy. …
4.2.2 The medical practitioner concerned must be informed in writing by the Case Manager, as soon as it has been decided:  That an investigation is to be undertaken;  The name of the Case Investigator;  The specific allegations or concerns that have been raised.” Framework for Managing concerns about ROs.
35.9 We were directed to a document at pages 2104-2129 which was the Framework for managing concerns about ROs who have a prescribed connection to a HLRO of NHS England. At page 2112, the following provision was included: “7. Investigation Concerns may be raised about an RO by/within an employing organisation as well as by a HLRO. If the concerns are raised by/within the employing organisation the CEO must contact the HLRO to notify them of the concern. In the case of a HLRO becoming aware of a concern about an RO, the HLRO will contact the CEO of the employing organisation to ensure they are aware of this. If a concern arises about an RO, an investigation may be deemed necessary and dealt with in the following way: Initial Assessment Phase The HLRO should:

• Ascertain if the CEO, General Manager, and/or Director of HR of the ROs designated body are aware of concerns;
• Ascertain if the RO works in other healthcare organisations and if they require informing;
• Ascertain the involvement of the GMC ELA and The National Clinical Assessment Service (NCAS) and involve where necessary;
• For designated bodies where the RO is also the owner, the CEO/board of the designated body (or equivalent) of the organisation will be consulted to ascertain the correct individuals
• In discussion with the above, and with appropriate colleagues establish a local decision making group, constituted from those recommended below*, and taking into account all that is known in relation to the RO and designated body, take a judgment as to whether: o An investigation is required, this judgement may include the use of a risk assessment relevant to the employing organisation o The RO should continue undertaking RO duties *Resources for this group may include; CEO, Chair, HR Director, Lay person, Medical Director if different from RO and an external RO if not. The group should usually include at least 3 out of 4 of the above with the option for one to nominate a deputy. NCAS and the GMC ELA (may / could) be used in an advisory manner and informed of relevant investigations in line with the designated body’s policy.” Grievance Policy

35.10 R’s Grievance policy was shown at pages SB731-749. In particular our attention was drawn to the following provision: “5. Process / Procedure Stage 1 – Informal Stage All grievances must be dealt with through the informal process in the first instance. Every attempt should be made by both the manager and the employee to resolve the issue in an informal manner, where possible, through discussion at a local level.” Joint Medical Director and CMO appointment 2018-20
35.11 From 2012 C shared the role of Joint MD of the DWMHPT with KG until she stepped down in January 2018. C carried out the RO duties at this time and KG was the Caldicott Guardian, although the substantial part of the MD role fell with C, because of his RO duties and as he covered adult care which was the majority of the workload. C had objected to this shared role from the outset as he felt it weakened the influence of the MD, given the possibility for differing views, although acknowledged that he and KG had made the arrangement work. C was approached in 2015 by the CEO at the time suggesting that KG be the single MD, with C as her deputy, and he strongly objected to this. When asked about this in cross examination, C explained that he felt that the previous CEO was deliberately trying to subordinate him and was exhibiting bad faith and bias in favour of KG. These plans to appoint KG did not transpire however as that CEO left and was replaced by MA in 2015 (with C holding the view that this was as a result of C raising concerns with the Board at the time). C held the view that when MA took over, he also showed favouritism towards KG and that he felt that MA could be complimentary to him one day and antagonistic the next. C felt that the reason this took place was subconsciously influenced by his race which was denied by MA. We were unable to make a finding of this nature on the scant evidence before us. No complaints of discrimination were raised by C at this time.
35.12 C continued as the single MD after KG subsequently left in 2018. For a period of time from May 2018 to 8 February 2019, an interim Joint MD was appointed. C was of the view that it had been widely accepted at the time of KG’s departure that a single MD role was preferable and this had been supported by the MAC, and that it was MA who insisted on reinstating the joint arrangement. C was of the view that appointing this individual was “demeaning and undermining” to him and undervalued his experience as his colleague had a “tiny fraction” of his experience. C believed that MA forced C to share the role because he knew C had CEO aspirations and wished to obstruct them. MA denied this was the case. We saw an exchange of e mails between MA and C from February 2018 when the issue of the joint MD role was being discussed (pages 69-72). C sent a lengthy e mail setting out his view that the structure at the time should be a single MD (C), with two Associate MDs being appointed to report to C. He set out in detail why he felt this arrangement was preferable, making many points about workload and other factors. MA acknowledged and stated that he agreed with many of the points made by C stating that a move to an interim joint role following KG’s departure was for a short time but was important, referring to the need for senior medical leadership input across a number of things and a need to ‘rebalance’ C’s workload. MA also said in response to cross examination that he felt that at that time post the TCT transaction ceasing, there was a lot to be done that involved clinical leadership at a senior level and C himself had identified his capacity as an issue. He told us that he took C’s views into account but took a different decision as the CEO at the time. There is insufficient evidence that any decision relating to the appointment of this individual or the sharing of this role was deliberately made to undermine C’s career progression. We conclude from this e mail exchange and oral evidence that capacity issues and the need for senior leadership cover was the main driver for this decision. We were unable to draw any inferences from any lack of recollection from MA about the precise details around decisions made in 2018 to suggest the motive C now alleges.
35.13 MA was C’s line manager and conducted appraisals in respect of his MD role. In his role as RO, C was also subject to a separate and very detailed appraisal process. C was taken to the written record of these appraisals during cross examination, C agreed that some of his appraisals with MA had been “patchy” but pointed to successful appraisals as an RO, which we accepted. Following the claimant’s MD appraisal for the year 2017-8, MA wrote to him (pages 148-150) informing that his rating for the period covered was ‘adequate’. This letter made reference to C having submitted additional information following an initial appraisal meeting in April 2018 when C had been unable to provide paperwork and had then submitted a 60-page document including feedback on C’s clinical role. MA noted that this appraisal had not been intended to appraise clinical work. He went on to note that there had been a number of positive achievements in particular the rating of ‘Good’ in the CQC assessment and good staff survey results. It confirmed that 2 of the 5 objectives set for that year had been achieved, with 2 being partially achieved and 1 not achieved. It set objective for the next year and suggested that areas for improvement were to focus on delivery of the challenges he put down. It further noted that there were capacity issues for C. C did not agree with the assessment provided and gave his view that MA had a tendency to understate what C did. NHS Leadership Academy Aspiring CEO Programme
35.14 This is a training programme devised for those within NHS management that aspired to become a CEO, providing a potential ‘pipeline’ for those on the path to becoming a CEO. It is a competitive programme that individual managers can apply for (with support from line managers) and a selection process is carried out to choose the candidates for participation. In 2015, C applied and although unsuccessful received positive feedback and was encouraged to apply again. In 2016, C did not apply having missed the deadline, stating that because he was working so hard at this time, he did not prioritise his own development. C also acknowledged that during this year he had failed to chase an opportunity to join a Leadership 360 programme during that year. C was reminded by e mail on 21 May 2018 that the deadline to apply for the 2018 NHS Leadership Academy Aspiring CEO programme was 2 weeks away. C did not apply by the deadline but contacted the organisers who indicated that his application would be considered if he received a prompt e mail from his line manager confirming that he was willing to support C’s application. C emailed MA at 10:57 pm on Sunday 3 June 2018 (when MA was on leave) asking MA to confirm by email by 10 am the following day that he was willing to support his application (page 134). When it was suggested that this was a chaotic way to put his request, C stated that he had been so committed to work and busy that he had not prioritised his own development needs. C felt that he had contributed to a successful year for DWMHPT and had advanced MA’s own aspirations to be CEO for any newly merged trust and thus it would not be too much to ask, given that his application had been supported in the past by MA. MA did not feel able to support C’s application on short notice, stating that he had not had the time to discuss it with C. We did not find this decision to be unreasonable given the short notice involved and we did not attribute any motive of bad faith or trying to block C’s career progression as seemed to be suggested.
35.15 C subsequently enrolled on and completed the Kings Fund Top Manager programme in 2019 which was a residential course of around 20-25 days attended by those in senior roles within the NHS. C acknowledged that he had the opportunity to network with many senior NHS managers including those in CEO roles. Merger of DWMHPT and the BCPNFT and establishment of R
35.16 We heard much evidence about the process by which R was formed and the previous attempt to merge (or be taken over) by the Birmingham Community FT in 2017 (‘the TCT proposal”). C strongly objected to this proposal and KG supported it, as did MF who at that time was the Integration Director. The TCT proposal did not ultimately go ahead with the MAC at the time expressing major reservations. After the TCT proposal came to an end, a new process began to merge DWMHPT and the BCPNFT which C was supportive of. C contended that this process was clinically led by him and his medical counterparts at BCPNFT through a JCE. R accepts that C was involved in the JCE which was led by both Joint MDs and also other senior directors. C was responsible for the development of the detailed clinical strategy for the newly merged trust even before his appointment as CMO in April 2020 (see below) and concerns had been raised by the reporting accountants as at March 2020 that this had not been completed (with only a 6 page sketch being in place). We were referred to a risk register completed at this time which identified that there was no clinical strategy in place for Day 1 which was designated as an amber risk.
35.17 In the run up to the executive appointments of the newly merged trust in 2020, there were discussions between C and MA about C again accepting a joint CMO arrangement with a colleague, MR. C contended again that MR had a fraction of his experience and also that the business case for the new trust included just one CMO. R contends that this had been the best option at the time and MA gave evidence that this was related to clinical capacity and feedback coming from NHSE about the development of clinical strategy not being in place for the newly merged trust. He also mentioned emerging concerns about a potential pandemic. C objected to the position being performed on a joint basis and wrote to MA on 28 January 2020 setting out his objections (pages 183-5). He stated that he considered moving him to a joint MD role to be a demotion and stated that given his knowledge of his own medical management team and the MAC’s views, that a joint MD structure would “damage the medical engagement”. C denied that this was coercive or that he was trying to use the views of the MAC as leverage for his own ambitions. Ultimately R accepted that a single CMO role was preferable with MA stating that he listened to C’s concerns and recognising them changed his decision.
35.18 C asked the Tribunal to draw inferences from statements he says were contradictory and untrue statements about the reasons why C was asked to perform the CMO role on a joint basis on two occasions and conclude that these had a discriminatory motive. However we were unable to conclude that any of the statements made were untrue or indeed particularly contradictory and ultimately C’s final request for the role to be performed on a sole basis was granted.
35.19 C applied for and was appointed to the CMO role as of 1 April 2020 when the merger took effect (see appointment letter at pages 256-7). The relevant job description for this role was set out at pages 244-255. MA became the CEO of the newly formed R at this time.
35.20 C’s first full year appraisal in his new role took place in August 2021. An e mail sent to the Claimant by MA with the record of that appraisal was shown at page 371 and recorded that C had an excellent year in particularly highlighting his response to the pandemic, appointment of senior clinical leadership team and moving forward with the clinical strategy post-merger. It emphasised that now the leadership team was in place, it was essential that C had to deliver on the first year of the clinical strategy acknowledging that strategic/system wide clinical leadership had been challenging for C in the past year. C stated that he believed that this was a ‘typical understatement’ of the work that he had done but we did not find this to be the case and appeared generally a balanced comment. Departure of MA as CEO and appointment of MA as Acting CEO
35.21 In November 2021, MA stepped down from his day-to-day CEO role as he was seconded to the ICB. At that time MF was the Chief Partnerships Officer (‘CPO’) and DCEO and was appointed by the Remuneration Committee as Interim CEO. CM who was the COO at the time was appointed as Interim DCEO. There was no competitive process to appoint to these two interim roles. This was announced to all staff by e mail on 19 November 2021 (page 375). SA was then appointed to the role of DCMO following an expression of interest process in January 2022 and C informed his executive colleagues by e mail on 11 January 2022 (page 408-9). Appointment of DCOO March-April 2022.
35.22 C was involved in the selection panel for the appointment to the role of DCOO which took place over two days on 31 March and 1 April 2022. This was chaired by CM (Black ethnicity) who was the recruiting manager and also included KKW (Mixed White and Asian ethnicity); AW (Non- White ethnicity); GD (White ethnicity) and AG (White ethnicity). C acknowledged that each of the six members of the selection panel had an equal voice albeit that the appointing manager, CM would have more of a say than others, especially if it was close. There were 5 candidates being interviewed. DC (White ethnicity) was one of the candidates who had been interviewed for the role and was an internal candidate who had worked for DWMHPT. C had worked alongside her (she was in a more junior role), and C felt she was good at her job but described her as not in his ‘camp’. PLK (Black British ethnicity) was another candidate who was external.
35.23 The process consisted of interviews of the candidates by those on the selection panel where each candidate was given a score from 1 to 3 by each member of the panel for answering each of 13 questions. The maximum score that could be achieved was 39 from each member of the panel and 234 across all 6 members of the panel. The candidate was also asked to give a presentation and would be scored up to a maximum of 5 points. This meant a maximum of 239 points were available with the ‘pass mark’ for being appointable being allocated at 167. The scores were then collated added up and the candidates were ranked. The completed score sheets for the exercise were shown at pages 423 to

437. C scored DC a total of 36 points on the interview questions which was the highest score given to any candidate by any of the panel members. When asked in cross examination whether he had reflected that perhaps his scoring was not as objective as it could have been and his previous knowledge was skewing his assessment, C said he always checked himself when scoring and felt that given the detailed notes he took, he could justify the scoring if he were challenged. C gave DC the highest overall score of the 5 candidates and PLK joint lowest. CM gave two other candidates a higher total score than PLK scoring PLK third with 29 and DC fourth with 28.5. AW also gave DC the highest score at 30 and ranked PLK joint second. GD ranked DC and PLK joint highest with a score of 29 each. KKW ranked PLK second with a score of 28.5 and DC 4th with 27.5. AG ranked DC second with a score of 30.5 and PLK third scoring her 29. 5.. DC’s total score for the interview questions across the whole panel was 181.5 which meant she was ranked first. PLK’s total score for the interview questions was 165.5 and she was ranked third. DC was scored 5 for her presentation for the group and PLK was scored 4.