JUDGMENT

1. The Claimant was suffering from a disability namely Lupus at the material time, which is 28th February 2024 onwards.

REASONS

1. The Claimant is employed by the Respondent, a national supermarket chain based in Newtown Powys. She is employed as a pharmacist and pharmacy manager from 10 August 2021 and remains employed with the Respondent company. Early conciliation started and ended on 23 May 2024. The Claim form was presented on 24 May 2024.

2. The case is listed today for a public preliminary hearing to determine the issue of disability.

3. The Claimant confirmed that the material time for her claim begins on 28th February 2024 and that prior to that date she was able to make informal reasonable adjustments which enabled her to carry out her role effectively.

Findings of Fact

4. The Claimant has produced 2 letters from her consultants and a letter from her GP. She also relied on her written statement and a statement from her husband, Mr Whitehouse and 2 statements from her work colleagues, Alex Cadwallader and Louise Barty.

5. The first letter is dated 01 August 2023, in that letter the diagnosis is stated “likely lupus, ANA positive 1:320, recurrent urticaria/angioedema, past bulimia, adverse reaction to hydroxychloroquine, hypothyroidism, Vitiligo, pernicious anaemia”. It also states that she is prescribed Phenergan.

6. The second letter is dated 10 July 2024, it repeats the diagnoses that were listed in the earlier letter. The medications are listed as Vitamin B12 injections, co- codamol, Thyroxine, Folic Acid and Duloxetine. The letter writer, Dr Patil states that he is considering treating her with Azathioprine and will review her in 6 months time,

7. The letter from the GP is dated 28th August 2024 it states that the Claimant has “likely systemic lupus which has manifested with previous skin problems and joint pains, these joint pains are generally managed well by Jackie…she gets joint pains and aches, particularly in the hands and feet which will make walking painful. This is more apparent at the end of the day. She has modified her footwear to make things easier for her and uses painkillers on as and when basis. She seeks regular attendance at surgery and at her specialist rheumatological department. In summary, Jackie has a long-term health condition which is a recognised disease and is likely covered by the dispensations with the equality act”.

8. In her evidence, Mrs Whitehouse explained how the condition affects her from day to day. She said that she cannot get up in the morning without assistance from her husband as her joints are painful. She said a rail was installed in the bathroom to help her use the toilet. She said that sometimes (approximately 3 times a week) she sleeps downstairs on the settee in the living room as it is too painful for her to walk up the stairs to go to the bedroom. She gave evidence to say that her husband helps her with her medication as she cannot open the blister packets and that he also makes her breakfast and then drives her to work. She gave evidence to say that she does not often go shopping, but that she was allocated a blue badge in August 2023 on Dr Ascari’s recommendation and that has made things easier for her.

9. Mrs Whitehouse gave evidence to say that she discussed her disability with her employer when she started work and has done so on a number of occasions since then when she has been challenged about wearing flip flops but on 28th February 2024, things became more difficult for her.

10. Mrs Whitehouse gave evidence to say that her role as a pharmacist is to check prescriptions are accurate once the dispenser has prepared the prescription. She does not therefore have to handle medications. In work she is on her feet all of the time, she does not take a lunch break or a toilet break. She is too worried about using the toilet as she has been told not to use the customer-disabled toilet and she is frightened that she will be unable to get off the toilet without assistance. She therefore does not eat and does not use the toilet all day, despite working from 9am until 7pm.

11. Mrs Whitehouse was asked why the consultants refer to “flare ups” in their letters. Mrs Whitehouse gave evidence to say that it is a constant flare up. That her condition has not dissipated but it has just got worse.

12. Mrs Whitehouse has not had any days off sick, she manages 5 staff but her role is to do a final check on the prescriptions, she does not dispense prescriptions as that is the role for the dispenser. She does not often need to use the till or to squat or bend down, despite what is recorded in the OH report, which she says was what the examiner suggested might be part of her role.

13. Mr Whitehouse was present, but his evidence was accepted and no questions in cross examination were put. Mr Whitehouse’s statement described how Mrs Whitehouse struggles with her pain and that he helps her in the morning to get out of bed and on and off the toilet and in the shower.

14. The two other witnesses also confirm that Mrs Whitehouse has difficulties, and they have to help her in work. The Law:

15. Disability is defined in Section 6 of the Equality Act 2010. It says, “A person has a disability if that person has ‘a physical or mental impairment’ which has a ‘substantial and long-term adverse effect on the person’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities” — S.6(1). The burden of proof is on the claimant to show that he or she satisfies this definition.

16. Paragraph 5 of Schedule 1 of the Act states: An impairment is to be treated as having a substantial adverse effect on the ability of the person concerned to carry out normal day-to-day activities if:

16.1 Measures are being taken to correct it, and
16.2 But for that, it would be likely to have that effect.

17. In Goodwin v Patent Office (1999) I.C.R 302 Morrison J held that the following four questions should be answered when determining whether or not a claimant has a disability:

a. Did the Claimant have a mental or physical impairment?
b. Did the impairment affect the claimant’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities?
c. Was the adverse condition substantial?
d. And was the adverse condition long-term?

18. Para. 12 of Schedule 1 of the EA 2010 provides that when determining whether a person is disabled, the Tribunal “must take account of such guidance as it thinks is relevant.” The “Equality Act 2010 Guidance on matters to be taken into account in determining questions relating to the definition of disability” (May 2011) (the “Guidance”) was issued by the Secretary of State pursuant to s. 6(5) of the EA 2010.

19. The Guidance says that “A disability can arise from a wide range of impairments” including “impairments with fluctuating or recurring effects such as rheumatoid arthritis, myologic encephalitis, chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, depression and epilepsy.

Conclusion:

20. The Respondent challenged the Claimant on the basis that there is no substantial long-term effect on her daily activities. Mr Davies argued that as she goes to work from 9-7 and does not eat or go to the toilet that her account is not credible. He also argued that as her account of her role differs to that of the Occupational Health report that she has exaggerated her evidence.

21. I find that the Claimant’s evidence is credible. She has described in detail her difficulties, which accord with the evidence given by her husband and her work colleagues. Her medical condition has been confirmed by her GP and the medication that she was prescribed increased substantially in the time between the two consultant letters. I accept the Claimant’s account that she struggles through the day as she loves her job but then has difficulties when she stops to sit down and when she gets home in the evening.

22. I therefore find that the Claimant does have a disability as defined by section 6 of the Equality Act which was present at the time of the meeting on 28th February 2024 and is ongoing.