JUDGMENT

The unanimous judgment of the Employment Tribunal is that all of the Claimant’s claims fail and are dismissed.

REASONS

THE ISSUES

1. This was a claim arising from the Claimant’s employment with the Respondents. The Claimant’s employment with the First Respondent began on 1 October 2018. He transferred to the Second Respondent on 1 August 2022. The Claimant’s employment ended on 6 August 2022. He had resigned prior to the transfer on 12 July 2022 giving four weeks’ notice, which he spent on garden leave.

2. The issues to be determined were agreed at a case management hearing held on 4 February 2022. At the start of the hearing, the Tribunal checked whether there were any changes to the agreed list of issues and confirmed some updates. A copy of the list of issues is attached as an appendix.

THE HEARING

3. The hearing was a remote hearing. From a technical perspective, there were a few minor connection difficulties from time to time. We monitored these carefully and paused the proceedings when required. The participants were told that it was an offence to record the proceedings.

4. The Claimant provided a written witness statement and gave live evidence.

5. For the Respondents we received written witness statements and heard live evidence from:

• Corrie Naylor, Customer Services Manager for the First Respondent
• Nicola Harding, who was the First Respondent’s Customer Support Manager for the UK and Northern Ireland at the relevant time;
• Caroline Cooney, First Respondent’s Employee Relations and HR Lead for the UK and Ireland
• Peter Jolly, First Respondent’s UK and Ireland Country Manager for Industrial Business
• Lee Elliott, First Respondent’s Services Category Manager for North West Europe
• Alison Cole, Second Respondent’s HR Business Take On Consultant

6. One of the First Respondent’s witnesses, Pascale Vandenbroucke, Field and Channel Delivery Manager for the European part of the First Respondent’s business, who is based in France, only provided a written witness statement. The First Respondent had planned that Ms Vandenbroucke would travel to the UK to participate in the video hearing. Unfortunately, she was not able to do so for unforeseen, but entirely legitimate medical reasons. Permission had not been given by the French authorities for her to give live evidence via video link.

7. The Claimant did not object to Ms Vandenbrouke’s statement being provided to the Tribunal. We arranged for him to be able to ask the witness two lots of questions in writing during the course of the hearing, which she answered in writing. In assessing what weight to give Ms Vandenbrouke’s evidence, the Tribunal has taken into account that she was not able to be cross examined in the usual way, but also that her involvement mostly post- dated the Claimant’s resignation.

8. The Tribunal ensured that each of the witnesses, who were all in different locations, had access to the relevant written materials which were unmarked. We were satisfied that none of the witnesses was being coached or assisted by any unseen third party while giving their evidence.

9. There was an agreed bundle of 1764 pages. Some additional documents were admitted into evidence during the course of the hearing with the agreement of the parties. We read the evidence in the bundle to which we were referred and refer to the page numbers of key documents that we relied upon when reaching our decision below in brackets.

10. We explained our reasons for various case management decisions carefully as we went along and also our commitment to ensure that the Claimant was not legally disadvantaged because he was unrepresented.

11. At the start of the hearing an issue arose as to the admissibility of certain evidence. To avoid the Tribunal learning the full detail of that evidence, we arranged, with the agreement of the parties, for a different judge, Employment Judge Adkin, to determine the issue. He decided the evidence should not be admitted and the Tribunal Panel were provided with redacted witness statements accordingly. He also identified some documents (in whole or in part) in the bundle which the Tribunal should disregard. We duly did this. One allegation on the list of issues was also removed.

12. Employment Judge E Burns apologises for the length of time it has taken to send this reserved judgment to the parties.

FINDINGS OF FACT

13. Having considered all the evidence, we find the following facts on a balance of probabilities.

14. The parties will note that not all the matters that they told us about are recorded in our findings of fact. That is because we have limited them to points that are relevant to the legal issues.

Background

15. The Claimant describes himself as a British Pakistani. It was not in dispute that he is a disabled man for the purposes of the Equality Act 2010 by reason of colitis. This is a condition he has had from an early age and for which he takes medication.

16. The Claimant commenced employment with the First Respondent as a Service Delivery Manager (“SDM”) based at a client site, Bank of America Merrill Lynch (“BAML”) on 1 October 2018 (145 – 163). Prior to this he had twenty five years experience of working in a variety of different roles in IT services, including at managerial level.

17. The First Respondent had first entered into a service delivery agreement to provide certain IT services to BAML in 2000. It was an important contract because it was one of the largest accounts the First Respondent had in the UK. The contract was renewed following a tender process after ten years and was due to be up for tender again in 2020. A one year extension had been agreed because of the Covid pandemic.

18. The First Respondent employed different people with different levels of responsibility for the relationship with the client and the delivery of services.

19. Corrie Naylor held the job title Customer Success Manager (“CSM”). She had the highest strategic level involvement with the client. Her responsibility was client relationship management including oversight of the commercial arrangements between the First Respondent and BAML, as well pricing and managing the First Respondent’s profit and loss arising from the relationship. Ms Naylor was a manage, but had notdirect reports. Ms Naylor had been responsible for the relationship between the First Respondent and BAML since she began her employment with the First Respondent in 2010.

20. The Account Delivery Manager’s (ADM’s) role was oversight in relation to delivery of the service level agreement commitments to BAML and invoicing. At the relevant time, the role was held by Simon Bayliss-Stranks.

21. The Claimant’s role, as SDM had responsibility for day to day operations on site.

22. The contract covered four BAML sites, three of which feel within the Claimant’s remit. These were the client’s head office in St Paul’s where he was based, a back office location in Bromley and a Disaster Recovery Site in Camberley. His team of people ranged in number from time to time between twenty to twenty four people during his period of employment. These were a mixture of staff employed by the First Respondent and people who the First Respondent referred oi as contingent workers. By this they meant, agency workers, some of whom were engaged to work at the BAML site on long term arrangements and some of who were brought in from time to time to [provide cover and or for particular tasks. The fourth site was in Chester. The onsite SDM there was Paul Short. His team, which was also made up a mixture of employees of the First Respondent and contingent workers numbered around seven people.

23. The Claimant and Mr Short were line managed by a line manager who held the role Market Lead & UKI Country Support Manager. In addition, they were required to have interaction with BAML staff, particularly Lee Hill who was responsible for Workplace Services Delivery. Others involved on the BAML side were more senior and included Gavin Van Rooyen and Richard Dickens.

24. Although the Claimant’s primary responsibility was day to day operations, his job description included the following: “Discuss and design service quotations for ad-hoc Project activity, ensuring these are delivered on time and successfully, with a health profit margin for HP, in line with HP policy” (712)

25. It is relevant to note that the First Respondent had the following relevant policies which were included in the bundle:

• Harassment-Free Work Environment Policy (111-112)
• Capability Policy (112 -123)
• Disciplinary Policy (124 – 133)
• Grievance Policy (134 – 137)
• Special Leave Policy (165- 171)

26. In addition, all of the First Respondent’s witnesses spoke about the “HP Way.” According to them, Mr Hewlett and Mr Packard who founded the HP Group in America, had instilled a particular approach to people management in the culture of the corporation. We were told that this involved showing compassion and empathy to employees and creating a work environment built on transparency and openness. It was notable that all of the First Respondent’s witnesses were long serving and considered themselves to have the culture engrained into them.

27. We also noted that all of them were white. We were not provided with any information about the ethnic make-up of the First Respondent’s workforce otherwise.

28. In the rest of this section we set out the chronology of relevant incidents as we found it occurred, although we note that we deviate from the chronology from time to time.

Claimant’s Line Manager

29. The Claimant’s direct line manager at start of his employment was Graeme Shields. Mr Shields moved into a different role in September/October 2020 and was due to be replaced by Nicola Harding with effect from January 2021.

30. Ms Harding had worked for the Respondent for more than twenty years and had been a manager since 1997. She was moving into the role from a very senior role as Chief of Staff, Head of Strategy and Planning to the UK and Ireland Managing Director. In the interim between Mr Shields leaving and Ms Harding taking over, Thomas Smith stepped in as the manager for all of Mr Shields’ reports. Mr Smith undertook the same role as Mr Shields in a different geographical area and for the interim period he covered both his and Mr Shields’ areas.

31. The Claimant and Mr Shields had had a good relationship. Mr Shields undertook annual appraisals with the Claimant for the years 2019 and 2020. Copies were provided in the bundle and included excellent positive feedback for the Claimant (1130 – 1137). In the 2020 appraisal, Mr Shields said: “I want to finish by thanking [the Claimant] for the last 2 years working together. I appreciate it’s been a fast and furious 24 months, but I am in admiration with what [the Claimant] has achieved, and the turnaround on performance for the account. The demand of the role is high, both from the client and [the First Respondent], but you have risen to that challenge. You have been a great support into me over the last few years, and I value that strongly. I really appreciate not only the work that he has managed, but the way in which he has approached his work. A Can-do Attitude, and always having a great sense of perspective and professionalism. With [his new line manager] this is a great opportunity for [the Claimant] to continue to develop his professional skills under the guidance of a new leader. I wish him all the very best, and ongoing success in the team and in [the First Respondent].” (1136)

32. It is notable, however, that in the 2019 appraisal document, Mr Shields was gently critical of the Claimant’s people management skills, suggesting he could have nipped some issues in the bud earlier to avoid having to take a more formal approach (1130 -1131). In addition, in 2020, Mr Shields identified, by way of personal development goals, that the Claimant should find ways to ensure he was accessed more support from others. In addition, he recommended the Claimant review how he managed people in the “HP Way.” (1136).

33. Ms Harding intended to have an introductory meeting with the Claimant on 27 November 2021, but this was pushed back to 7 December 2021. A meeting did take place on 27 November 2021, but also included Thomas Smith and was in relation to a different topic as explained further below.

Feedback from BAML (16 October 2020)

34. The first chronological incident that the Claimant has complained about concerns some feedback from BAML that he was expecting to be told about.

35. On 16 October 2020, Mr Hill sent the Claimant an instant messenger message saying that he had “passed on some feedback to [Ms Naylor} today about the great support we have been getting”. He added that he hoped it would find its way to the Claimant (1123).

36. Having not received any feedback, on 12 November 2020, the Claimant sent an email to Ms Naylor, Mr Bayliss-Stranks and Mr Shields asking if he had had any direct feedback from BAML, adding that it would be nice to have it for his end of year review. The reference to his end of year review was a ruse. The Claimant was trying to find out what Mr Hill had said to Ms Naylor on 16 October 2020 without specifically asking about it.

37. Neither Ms Naylor nor GS replied to the Claimant’s email. Mr Bayliss- Stranks replied a few days later on 16 November 2020 and said that he had not had anything specific. Mr Bayliss- Stranks mentioned that he was aware that Mr Hill was very happy with some recent project work however. This was a reference to the Refresh Project which was an ongoing piece of work that involved the First Respondent upgrading the IT equipment being used by BAML’s employees on a regular cycle.

38. Much later, on 1 February 2021, the Claimant emailed Ms Harding, copying her the instant message between Mr Hill and himself, to say that it would be nice to see the feedback (1123). Ms Harding has not been in post at the relevant time and therefore asked Ms Naylor about it.

39. Ms Naylor replied to her the following day to say that she thought Mr Hill was referring to the feedback he had given on the Refresh project. Ms Naylor explained that she had not fed this back to the Claimant at the time because it was not a comment about the Claimant specifically, but about the entire team’s performance. In addition, she said that she thought the Claimant had been already aware of it having been present when Mr Hill had been positive about the Refresh project. Finally, she said that Mr Hill had also said a number of negative things about the Claimant. We took this to mean that she did want to provide feedback to the Claimant that was misleading. She had added: “To be honest, if he wants to chase down positive feedback from the bank or maybe even suggest that I am withholding it from him, then I think he should be getting the other 95% of the conversation so he can hear the amount of negatives purely about him.” (1122)

Manpower (17 November 2020)

40. The next relevant incident took place in November. Although Ms Harding had not yet started in her role, she was contacted by Mr Smith, who asked her to take part in a meeting with him and the Claimant to discuss Manpower. As noted above, Ms Harding had arranged to have an introductory meeting with the Claimant on 27 November 2020, but agreed with Mr Smith that he should use that meeting to discuss the Manpower issue.

41. The Manpower issue had been triggered by a lengthy email from Ms Naylor dated 17 November 2020 to Ms Cooney in HR, copying in Mr Bayliss- Stranks (264-265). Manpower had a contract with the First Respondent to undertake all desk moves for BAML staff. The work was undertaken by contingent workers.

42. In her email, Ms Naylor reported that she and Mr Bayliss-Stranks had some concerns about a few things at BAML that were not compliant with the First Respondent’s policies and posed a potential risk to the First Respondent and BAML in terms of contract delivery.

43. Specifically, Ms Naylor’s email said: “Through conversations that both of us have had independently with members of the team, we believe that the SDM in London, is behaving

inappropriately and putting the service at risk:

• [the Claimant] makes no secret of the fact that he does not like Manpower, he thinks that there are performance issues and want to introduce a new supplier called Synergise. [Mr Bayliss-Stranks] has explained that this decision is not his scope and that if he has concerns we need to address with Manpower and with Global Procurement as a starting point.
• He has approached [IQUO Limited] directly to see if/how existing Manpower engineers can sign up with them and transfer over to them.
• He has approached the Manpower Team Lead (Jamie Parrott) and asked her to decide to change to either [IQUO Limited] or Synergise. Apparently she feels intimidated and fearful for her job so has only spoken to a couple of team members rather than doing anything formal.
• There have been complaints about how he is treating some of the Manpower [contingent workers], some of which have worked with us for many years and are now apparently considering leaving. There are examples of contractors being texted not only after hours but also very late at night “The other concern that we have is that despite many conversations with both [the Claimant] and [Mr Shields] in the past about responsibility for customer pricing and commercial decisions residing with the ADM and CSM, [The Claimant] continues to challenge and want to make his own decisions, regardless of the internal [position] or the contracts we have put in place with the customer. We thought that this issue had been resolved earlier this year however, recently we have an example where he wants to provide break/fix service free of charge for a new device type when it is very clearly a chargeable item. After several discussions we are now working it through as a chargeable change request, however, we are not confident that the core issue is resolved.” (262)

44. In his evidence to the Tribunal, the Claimant accepted that he had been unhappy with the service provided by Manpower and had raised this. This was because he felt that Manpower was too expensive. He wanted the First Respondent to put an alternative in place at BAML. His view was that this was part of his remit because his job description included the reference noted in paragraph 24 above.

45. The First Respondent disagreed that this type of issue came within the scope of his role, particularly as the First Respondent’s Global Procurement department was responsible for the arrangements with Manpower. In addition, the First Respondent told the Tribunal that the Claimant did not have full visibility of the commercial arrangements between the First Respondent and either BAML or Manpower as this sat with others more senior to him. He was therefore not in a position to assess the costs of the Manpower service. We find that notwithstanding the Claimant’s job description, the Respondent’s stated position in relation to this point was the accurate one.

46. The Claimant also accepted that he had approached the other agencies to discuss how he might go about setting up a flexible team via them that could do the work being done by Manpower.

47. In addition, he accepted that he had asked Jamie Parrot about whether she could move from Manpower to another agency, but denied intimidating her. He told us that once Ms Parrot had told him that she was signed up with Manpower and was unable to transfer agencies, he had accepted this and did not raise it any further. The Claimant also denied treating Manpower operatives badly. The Tribunal was not presented with any evidence that corroborated the allegations involving Jamie Parrot or the Manpower operatives. The First Respondent did not investigate them at the time.

48. The Claimant told us that he felt ambushed by the change of topic at the meeting. He had prepared a power point presentation introducing himself and his team to Ms Harding and was not able to deliver this. We find that the reason for the change of topic was Ms Naylor’s email and that the change was instigated by Mr Smith, who led the discussion at the meeting. It was Mr Smith who wanted to raise the Manpower issue with the Claimant, but who wanted Ms Harding to be involved, given that she would be starting in her new role in January 2021.

49. The outcome of the meeting was that the Claimant agreed not to pursue his ideas about creating a team to replace the Manpower team. However, notwithstanding the meeting, there were on-going discussions about the Claimant’s attitude towards Manpower. An example can be seen in an email chain from 15 to 16 December 2020 which concerned a project to refresh IT equipment for BAML staff based in Camberley (366 – 391). The Claimant, who was on leave at the time, complained in emails sent to Mr Bayliss- Stranks, Mr Biggs and Mr Short about Manpower needing five days to do what he considered to be three days’ work. Although Mr Bayliss-Stranks confirmed that this was all agreed with BAML, the Claimant continued to challenge it. This culminated in Ms Naylor emailing him, copying in the others, on 16 December 2020 to say: “Please can I remind you of a few things – some of which we have been through many times. In no particular order:

1. Cost, pricing and P&L are not within your scope. I fully support [Mr Bayliss-Stranks] with his position on this.

2. We need to take into consideration the bank’s request, the criticality of this activity, the upcoming RFP and the current Covid situation.

3. [Mr Biggs] has been managing this specific activity extremely successfully for many years. He has the banks trust and I also trust him and his judgement implicitly in terms of what is needed to deliver the project and satisfy the customer. Likewise, I implicitly trust [Mr Short] both as Chester SDM and overall lead when he is in that position. We have all worked together for over 5 and a half years.

4. Manpower have been a loyal, reliable and trusted partner to [the First Respondent], providing this custom service for over 10 years. If you have issues or any concerns with them, then we need evidence so that it can be addressed through the appropriate channels. With all of the above, plus the fact that our entire team continue to give 100% throughout this extremely difficult times, I am struggling to understand why energy is being spent on email battles over something that is logical and straightforward. We have greater priorities.” (370)

Graham Hill and Paul Short (30 November 2020)

50. The next relevant incidents occurred a few days after the meeting. On 30 November 2020 Paul Short spoke to Ms Harding to inform her that he had concerns about the Claimant’s behaviour. The concerns were with regard to the Claimant not working collaboratively. Ms Harding told us that Mr Short was quite emotional when speaking to her and she felt he was being genuine.

51. Mr Smith had been prompted to speak to Ms Harding after an email exchange with the Claimant about billing on 24 November 2020. After some mistakes were found in some invoices the Claimant said that he thought the London team should be responsible for its own billing, even though a member of Mr Short’s team was responsible for it. He said that the reason was because he would rather be in control of the London billing. Mr Short replied to him saying, “Yes, but you’d rather be in control of everything!” The Claimant replied to say that he was sorry Mr Short felt like this (996).

52. On the same day, Ms Harding also received an email from Mr Smith forwarding an email chain between Graham Hill, a senior manager on the print side of the business and the Claimant (311).

53. Mr Graham Hill had emailed Mr Smith on 27 November 2020 complaining a difficult conversation he had had with the Claimant that morning. He described it as “amongst the most heated of which I’ve had in my 34 years at HP” (312). He described the call as confrontational and said that it ended abruptly. He provided Mr Smith with the email exchange that gave the history and flavour of the exchange the Claimant had first had with others that was then escalated to Mr Hill. We note that one of the Claimant’s emails says quite simply, “Graham…..shoddy service.” (315)

54. Mr Hill added that this was not the first instance where the Claimant had tried to engage him at the last minute to in an issue which should be routine activity. He concluded his email to Mr Smith saying: “I think it is fair to say we’ve all been in a position at some point in our HP careers where things don’t go as planned. The HP way in which we solve these situations is to work harmoniously and collaboratively for the best possible Customer and HP outcome. From my dealings with [the Claimant] I’d suggest that these are principles he has failed to adopt, to everyone’s detriment.” (314).

55. Ms Harding thanked Mr Smith for the email and mentioned to him that she had spoken to HR about the Claimant in light of the complaint she had had from Paul Short. She asked Mr Smith if he wanted her to pick the issue with Mr Graham Hill up too. He replied saying: “If you can pick up with [Mr Graham Hill] would be good. It might also be a good idea to quickly talk to Graeme Shields as well…Just to make sure this isn’t a crusade against [the Claimant”] (311)

56. As suggested, Ms Harding spoke to Ms Shields about the matter. She replied to Mr Smith saying, “I think it is 60 - 40 in [the Claimant’s] favour from having spoken with Graeme S.” (311)

57. The complaints by Mr Short and Mr Hill were not brought to the Claimant’s attention at this time. When asked about it at the Tribunal Hearing, the Claimant did not accept that he had communicated with Mr Graham Hill in an inappropriate way.

1 December 2020

58. On 1 December 2022, in the course of an email exchange collating information for reporting purposes, the Claimant challenged a decision taken by Mr Short. The decision was to recruit a contingent worker on a three month contract. The Claimant’s reason for challenging the recruitment was because he considered work levels were quiet due to COVID-19 and Mr Short did not need the additional resource. Mr Bayliss-Stranks was copied into the email and he forwarded it to Ms Naylor, without either Mr Short or the Claimant having been copied in saying: “I can see [the Claimant’s] point regarding how quiet it is at present, but don’t think he should be questioning how [Mr Short] runs Chester. Just causes

tension in an already stress[ed] world ”

Ms Naylor replied saying:

“He’s out of order and needs to look after his own issues!” (323)

59. On 1 December 2020, Ms Harding emailed Mr Shields and her line manager, Pascale Vandenbroucke, Head of Delivery NE, UK & I, CE, SE Markets with some of the complaints she had received about the Claimant. At this time, Ms Vandenbroucke was in the process of determining whether the Claimant should be given an equity award for his performance in 2020. Based on a recommendation from Mr Shields, Ms Vandenbroucke had recommended the Claimant for equity. However, as result of Ms Harding’s concerns and her own view that the Claimant was using a pushy and inappropriate behaviour to drive his business, she decided to recommend the equity proposal be removed. Her email confirming this explains that she was “ok with him receiving a bonus as a reward for past performance” but she felt equity would encourage the wrong behaviour (329)

Introductory meeting

60. Ms Harding conducted the postponed introductory meeting with the Claimant on 3 December 2020. Ms Harding came away with a positive view of the Claimant and said in her evidence to the tribunal, “This was a very pleasant call, and I was impressed with his professional demeanour.”

Richard Henry

61. The Claimant took a fortnight’s leave from early December 2019. While he was absent on leave, Mr Short covered his role remotely.

62. While the Claimant was absent, Mr Short was contacted by Jackie Tolhurst, a Consultancy Manager from IQUO Limited. She raised concerns with him about the Claimant and the position of one of her contractors, Richard Henry. He was supplied to work on the BAML contract under the Claimant’s management at the Bromley site. Mr Short asked Ms Tolhurst to put her concerns in writing which she did (336). Mr Short forwarded the email to Ms Harding on 7 December 2019 (335).

63. Ms Tolhurst said in her lengthy email that Mr Henry had been offered a three month extension to his contract, but felt unable to accept it because he wanted to take January off. She explained that he had worked full time every week in 2019 and felt exhausted. According to her, Mr Henry had asked for holiday earlier in the year, but this was not granted and instead he was required to work on standby. She added that Mr Henry felt he was being “emotionally bullied into coming to site each day” by the Claimant and both she and Mr Henry felt they could not approach the Claimant directly “without suffering consequences”.

64. Ms Harding thanked Mr Short for forwarding the email and said she would pick it up with Ms Tolhurst directly. She did this by telephone on 10 December 2020. The call lasted about an hour. Ms Harding had not met or spoken to Ms Tolhurst prior to this so some of the call was an opportunity for Ms Tolhurst to introduce herself and IQUO Limited to Ms Harding. During the call Ms Tolhurst also raised the concerns about Mr Henry.

65. Ms Harding agreed with Ms Tolhurst that Mr Henry could take the month of January 2022 off. She did not contact the Claimant to tell him this, nor speak to him about the email from Ms Tolhurst at this time. The Claimant found out that Mr Henry was taking January off when he returned from leave on 29 December 2020.

66. When asked about Mr Harding’s previous leave request at the Tribunal Hearing, the Claimant explained that he felt he had treated Mr Henry fairly in relation to the week he had worked on standby. He said that the issue over Mr Henry’s leave resulted from there being strict COVID-19 protocols in place which meant that in order to provide cover for him in Bromley, the Claimant would have had to ask one of the team based in Head Office team to isolate for two weeks before he or she would have been permitted to enter the Bromley site. He would also have needed them to isolate for a further two weeks afterwards, before they were able to return to Head Office.

67. The Claimant’s solution was to allow Mr Harding to take a week off in September 2020 as long as he remained on standby in case of emergencies. The Claimant did not consider that he had treated Mr Henry unfairly. In fact, he felt that the arrangement had been to Mr Henry’s advantage because it meant he continued to get paid, whereas as a contractor he would not normally have been entitled to paid leave. He said that Mr Henry had not had to deal with any calls and so had benefited from a week of paid standby without having to do any work. We disagree with this assessment. Being on standby does not all an individual the level of rest required when taking annual leave.

Russell Lawrence

68. Another event occurred while the Claimant was absent on annual leave. The father of a member of his team, Russell Lawrence, died. He had had a diagnosis of terminal cancer two years earlier.

69. On 11 December 2020, Mr Short emailed the Claimant, Ms Naylor and Mr Bayliss-Stranks to inform them that he had been passed the sad news about Mr Lawrence’s father and mentioned that Mr Lawrence had said that he would appreciate it if he could be left alone for a period of time to grieve with his family.

70. On Monday 14 December 2020, the Claimant replied to the email saying: “Hi Paul, did you speak with Russell about his return, I’m conscious Russ has the break/fix billing to complete” (356)

71. In response to the email, about twenty minutes later, Ms Naylor replied to all, but addressing the email to the Claimant saying: “As Russell’s father has sadly passed away I do not think that we should be asking when he is back. We should use backup for invoicing – if it cannot be done in London then I’m sure that Chester can pick up again.” (356)

72. Around a further thirty minutes later, Mr Short also replied to all to say that he agreed with Ms Naylor. He said that he had not spoken to Mr Lawrence to ask him when he was coming back as he did not think it would be appropriate, given that he had made a made a point of asking to be left alone with his family. Two hours later, Mr Bayliss-Stranks also replied to all saying he agreed that Mr Lawrence should not be approached. He suggested a way forward to get the December billing done.

73. The Claimant replied around twenty minutes later, copying in Ms Harding so that she became part of the email, confirming the December billing would be done, but suggested that he needed to know a return date for Mr Lawrence in order to be able to plan accordingly. He added that Mr Lawrence had been supported over the past few months and then said, “As per the policy (attached) leave needs to be approved between the manger and employee and that was the reason for my initial question as I didn’t speak with Russell” (355).

74. Ms Naylor then replied to all, addressing her email to the Claimant saying: “I completely agree that we need to plan however I would expect us to already have back-ups and training in place so that we always have a contingency plan. This has been a topic that we have had periodically over the past couple of years as people have left or when unfortunately unexpected events have happened. Russ’ situation is sadly not out of the blue so I would have thought that everything was already in place on standby.” (354)

75. Having been copied in by the Claimant, Ms Harding joined the email chain at this point, even though it was 7:42 pm. She began by saying how sorry she was to hear of the loss of Mr Lawrence’s father. She said that she felt that Mr Short had acted appropriately and that they should not be asking Mr Lawrence for a return date at that time due to his bereavement. She suggested that the normal amount of compassionate leave for a close relative was one to two weeks. She requested the Claimant refrain from reaching out to Mr Lawrence until after the Christmas break to give him the time he needed. She also suggested discussing contingency planning with the Claimant and Mr Short in the New Year (353 – 354).

76. The Claimant responded straight away to all to say that there was no issue with backup or contingency for Mr Lawrence’s role, but that there was a problem with a lack of backup for a task for which he was responsible, namely preparation of the monthly and weekly governance (GSM) packs. He said that issued needed to be resolved (353).

77. He then replied, the following day, privately to Ms Harding. He criticised Ms Naylor’s intervention saying, “Once again Corrie has confused the issue with having back-ups, that is not the case.” He defended his position saying: “According to policy, Russell should be back on Friday if his father passed on Thursday, however, I think his passing was earlier. Paul should have checked with Russell. We are stretched in London, I’m off, Russell [Lawrence] is away, we have a major project ongoing and Lee [Biggs] is managing on his own so it would have been good to know what time Russell needs. (352)

He then added:

“As for the billing, Paul [Short] should be checking in on the London team to see how they are getting on but I don’t think he’s done that so it’s up to me. On the GSM pack, Paul [Short] and I were both shown how to complete but Paul has refused.” (352)

78. Ms Harding did not address the points made by the Claimant, but replied to say that she would arrange a one to one meeting between them in early January 2021 (352). She told the Tribunal that she personally found that the Claimant’s lack of empathy for Mr Lawrence’s position to be shocking.

79. Mr Lawrence subsequently requested his compassionate leave be extended to 11 January 2021. He also asked if he could continue to work form home so he could support his mother.

80. On 30 December 2020, the Claimant, who was back at work, emailed Ms Harding about this request to say that he needed Mr Lawrence in the office as soon as possible along with another member of his team, Lee Biggs. He noted that Mr Lawrence had been away since 9 December, albeit on annual leave between 21 to 31 December 2020, and he queried whether Mr Short had told HR about Mr Lawrence’s absence.

81. The Claimant then forwarded Ms Harding an email exchange between him and Mr Lawrence dating back to October 2020 whereby Mr Lawrence had requested that he be permitted to work from home due to his father being in a terminal condition. In his email to Ms Harding, the Claimant said he had asked Mr Biggs and Mr Lawrence to rotate home working, but that had not materialised and they had both been working from home. He said that there was a lot to do that could not be done remotely and concluded by saying, “We can’t limit ourselves by team members arbitrarily choosing to WFH” (412)

82. Ms Harding replied on Sunday, 3 January 2021, copying in HR, to say that from her perspective, she would like to honour Mr Lawrence’s request for compassionate leave until 11 January 2021. She asked HR for advice on Mr Lawrence’s position going forwards given his need to support his mother. She then asked the Claimant to replying setting out his requirements for an on-site resource (412).

83. As a result of Ms Harding’s intervention, Mr Lawrence was not required to return to work until 11 January 2021. Ms Harding also ensured that Mr Lawrence was credited back the annual leave he had taken between 21 and 31 December 2020 and that this was treated as compassionate leave. She explained to the tribunal that although the Respondent’s policy on Compassionate leave refers to one to two weeks being the typical length of time that employees would be given as paid leave for an immediate family member, the period can be shorter or longer depending on the particular individual’s circumstances. She felt that allowing Mr Lawrence to take until 11 January 2021 was appropriate in his case because he was supporting his mother and helping arrange the funeral, as well as dealing with his own grief.

84. On Sunday 10 January 2021, the evening before his return to work, the

Claimant emailed Mr Lawrence, copying in Mr Biggs saying:

“Hi Russ, please can we arrange a collection for the 19/20th Jan. Darren has also sent a list.” (479).

85. Having been copied into the email, Mr Biggs decided to bring it to the attention of Mr Short, Ms Harding and Ms Naylor. He forwarded it to them that evening with a cover email saying: “Please witness below email from [the Claimant] to Russ, another example of [the Claimant’s] very very shocking people skills Shocking compassion and shocking management of humanity!!!!!! No mention at the very least, “welcome back Russ, hope you and your family are well.” No!!!!! Straight into the robot work mode… work mode that has put others at risk and let’s face it, shoddy management. I am completely disgusted with [the Claimant’s] ongoing lack of alliance for people & staff. We now live in a new world, a new world that requires more compassion than ever before. A Covid Vaccine is the first step, but has [the First Respondent] a Vaccine to prevent the like of [the Claimant]…(479).

86. None of Mr Short, Ms Harding and Ms Naylor did anything about the email. The Claimant only learnt about the email as part of the litigation disclosure. He did not see it at the time or at any time before his subsequent resignation.

87. When giving evidence, the Claimant acknowledged that he did not express condolences to Mr Lawrence in this or any other email, but said that he did this in person when Mr Lawrence was in the office. We note that in the Claimant’s earlier reply to the email from Mr Lawrence informing the Claimant that his father’s condition had become terminal (12 October 2020) the Claimant had replied saying, “Hi Russ, I’m sorry to read this. I wish you and the family well at this difficult time. You have my support” (413). He maintained that Mr Lawrence should not have been given as much time off as he had been given and that Ms Harding had undermined him by allowing Mr Lawrence an extended period off.

88. Our factual conclusion is that Ms Harding’s actions were necessary to ensure that Mr Lawrence was supported and that the Claimant failed to manage him in an HP Way.

BAML Covid Testing Station

89. In early January, BAML was setting up a Covid testing station and wanted the First Respondent’s assistance to get the computer side of this up and running. This work was outside the main contract. Ms Naylor and Ms Harding were unhappy that the Claimant had committed to doing it without first involving them to discuss the pricing and operational demands.

Lockdown January 2021

90. On 4 January 2021, a further period of full lockdown was announced in England. From 6 January 2021, this meant a legal obligation to work at home unless it was impossible to do so.

91. The First Respondent issued a statement to all its employees confirming it would be mandating a work from home policy. It included guidance for HP Engineers working at customer sites that they must wear masks at all times when on customer sites, even if the customer was not requiring this (455- 456).

92. Following a call with the Claimant, Ms Harding challenged the Claimant about not wearing a mask at the BAML site. Rather than accept that he was required to do so, the Claimant challenged the requirement (428). He told the Tribunal that he thought the guidance applied to engineers who were visiting customer sites, rather than his team who were based at the client’s site.

93. Because of the new lockdown, various members of the Claimant’s team raised concerns about on-site working and having to travel to work (429 – 431). Ms Harding contacted the Claimant and Mr Short to ask them to send a message to their teams (454) and to set up a discussion as to what impact the lockdown would have on them (523). This included inviting members of the teams to say if they had any reasons for not being able to work on-site at any time.

94. Ms Harding’s aim from the discussions was to achieve a balance whereby the First Respondent was complying with the law, but at the same time able to meet its service level commitments to BAML. She envisaged this would be best achieved by developing an on-site rota that provided on-site cover as needed, but enabled all members of the First Respondent’s Team at both sites, including the Claimant, to do some work from home. In addition, she explored whether it would be possible to arrange for BAML or the First Respondent to pay for taxis for anyone attending on-site to avoid them having to use public transport.

95. At some point during his discussions with Ms Harding about the rota, the Claimant mentioned that he was taking medication that result in him being immunosuppressed because of a long term health condition.

96. The Claimant told the tribunal that taking immunosuppressant drugs made him particularly vulnerable to catching COVID-19. He did not, however, adduce any corroborating evidence to support his contention.

97. The Claimant did not tell Ms Harding that he was at an increased level of risk or say to her that he needed to shield or work from home as a result. He also did not say that he considered himself to be suffering any kind of disadvantage as a result of having to work on-site. We find, as a matter of fact, that if the Claimant had told Ms Harding that he was at risk because of his medical condition, she would have taken all necessary steps to ensure that he was able to work from home. This is based on the view she took of others who needed to work from home.

98. In any event, Ms Harding encouraged the Claimant to consider some work from home. He was given responsibility for creating a rota that would enable him to share the on-site management responsibility with Mr Biggs so that they could take it turns to be on site, but chose not to do this. He also refused the option of travelling to work in a taxi, saying he preferred to travel by tube.

99. Although the Claimant had allowed certain members of his team to work from home, he was unhappy with other members of his team doing this, in his view, without his approval. His key concerns were centred around Mr Biggs, Mr Lawrence and two other employees Kevin Frost and Vasi Sothirajah.

100. Mr Biggs’ position was that he was prepared to work on-site when needed, but he believed that he could do the majority of his role remotely. He spoke directly to Ms Harding about this and confirmed that he was happy to attend on-site when the work needed could not be done remotely.

101. Mr Lawrence was continuing to work from home following his bereavement so that he could provide support to his mother. Mr Sothirajah wanted to work from home as much as possible due to home schooling commitments. The Claimant did not believe that either of them should be permitted to do so.

102. Mr Frost requested that he be permitted to work from home because of concerns about shielding family members. Ms Harding arranged a call with him and the Claimant to better understand this request on 11 January 2021. When the Claimant did not attend the call, she agreed, in the Claimant’s absence, to Mr Frost being allowed to work from home for the immediate future (488). Her reason was that she accepted that Mr Frost had a genuine need to do so. The Claimant felt undermined by this and did not accept that Mr Frost should be allowed to work from home. His view was that the situation did not fall into the Government’s guidelines for support bubbles and so Mr Frost should not be allowed to work from home.

103. Ms Naylor and Mr Bayliss-Stranks discussed the Claimant’s reaction to his colleagues concerns in a private exchange of messages on 6 January 2021. Ms Naylor described the Claimant as “heartless” and commented that she thought he did not believe in Covid. Mr Bayliss-Stranks described him as “delusional” and also said that he was a “dickhead, oblivious to the real world”. He commented that “several of our team lost people though all this period and he’s got his head in the sand” (422-423). Mr Bayliss-Stranks also emailed Ms Harding on 7 January 2021 to say that he thought, “The Claimant doesn’t get the enormity of this all [referring to COVID-19). He added, “Apologies for being a bit quiet on the calls. My Dad passed away from Covid in April so it is all still a bit close to home.” (453)

104. During this period, the Claimant failed to attended some video meetings that Ms Harding arranged with the team to discuss the on-site working arrangements. He also failed to respond promptly to some of her emails and when he did, his emails were abrupt. Ms Harding considered them to be combative. Our finding is that her interpretation was correct. The emails were not at all collaborative, in stark contrast to the emails Ms Harding was sending to the Claimant.

105. For example, on Tuesday 12 January 2021, Ms Harding emailed the Claimant and Mr Bayliss-Stranks at 20:05 to clarify some points ahead of a meeting arranged with the entire team the following day to discuss the BAML on-site requirements. This was one of the meetings that the Claimant did not attend.

106. The Claimant replied at 21:38 with a lengthy email in which he responded to the points. Of particular note, he accused Ms Harding of giving Mr Biggs implied permission to work from him by not responding to an email Mr Biggs had sent to her in which he said he intended to work from home. He also said that he did not understand why Ms Harding thought there was no rota in place as the London team had been rotating for many months.

107. Ms Harding replied at 21:49 to say that the Claimant should not reply further as she felt a telephone conversation would be a more constructive way to discuss the issues, but made some points in response to those made by the Claimant. Among these she said that the Claimant’s comments about Mr Biggs were an “unacceptable statement” She added, “[Mr Biggs] works for you. You should follow up with him to address his concerns as his manager. We had a call this week to discuss getting a comms in place to get staff on site which you failed to join. This could have been part of the discussion.” In response to the Claimant’s comments about the rota she replied, “The rotation file you shared last week has some staff on site five days a week. This is not a rotation on reduced site presence. I’m still waiting for this view.” (542-543)

108. Ms Harding forwarded the email exchange to Ms Naylor who replied at 10:13 pm saying: “Not sure what to say now…. I hoped that by talking to you both and the pip tomorrow, we could start to get a breakthrough, but obviously not. He is blatantly rude and disrespectful, his responses are not coherent and none of it adds up. He has dismantled all of the flexibility, teamwork, basic POM, comms, tracking, etc that was put in place by [Mr Shields] and the previous leads…. I feel really bad that you have come into it. If there is anything that I can do, let me know. Stay strong, we WILL get through it!!!!” (534)

109. Notwithstanding Ms Harding’s instruction not to reply to the email, the Claimant did so at 22:17 that same night simply saying, “On [Mr Biggs] – did you agree with [Mr Lawrence] and [Mr Frost] that they could work from home – because I didn’t approve and I should have as their manager so I’m assuming you did?” (541)

110. Ms Harding replied at 7:05 am the following morning, saying: “For [Mr Frost] we had a call this Monday at 9 am which you failed to turn up to, so I then had to step in listen to [Mr Frost’s] concerns re his family circumstances. As you were not there and had not asked to reschedule the mtg I advised Kevin that in the Pandemic situation and with the risk levels he described, particularly with getting to work he could work remotely until the situation was assessed on Tuesday 12th with yourself, [Mr Bayliss- Stranks] and [Ms Naylor] Corrie. Again, you failed to join this call on 12th. This is the reason I have been repeatedly asking for a review of reduced site attendance during the Tier 5 set up and London major incident. As for [Mr Lawrence] I agreed his compassionate leave to 11th. You were included in all mails. I have not discussed his working from home, but his family setup clearly indicates that he is not in a position to be on site. It’s your role as his manager to be in touch verbally with him and talking through the issues of risk and then plan accordingly to manage that workload if he cannot be on site. Extraordinary times means as managers we have to manage new setups and manage change. It is not business as usual and its [Mr Bayliss-Stranks’] role to clear any proposal you bring to the table with [BAML].” (541)

111. Ms Harding forwarded the email chain to HR. She also forwarded it to Lee Elliott, UK & I Services Category Manager marked ‘Private and Confidential, do not forward’ saying “So you can see what I am up against.” (541) Ms Harding told the Tribunal that she did this because in his role, Mr Elliott was the sales lead for BAML and she had been discussing the process of retendering for the BAML contract with him. She told us that although she had had interaction with Mr Elliott in her previous role, she did not know him well. She felt it was important that he was aware of any concerns at BAML however, to ensure the First Respondent had the best chance possible of winning the contract when re-tendered.

112. On Friday 15 January 2021, Mr Van Rooyen rang Ms Naylor to tell her that someone from the First Respondent (whom he refused to name) had told him that the First Respondent intended to reduce the on-site presence regardless of the implications for service delivery and its contractual commitments to BAML. She emailed him on 19 January 2021 after speaking to Ms Harding and Mr Bayliss-Stranks to reassure him that the First Respondent was revisiting its rota for on-site presence in light of the new lockdown, but had no intention of reducing its commitment to service delivery (688). Ms Naylor believed that the person who had spoken to Mr Rooyen was the Claimant. The Claimant did not dispute this when giving evidence to the Tribunal.

GMS Deck Issue

113. A further issue that arose related to the preparation of the GSM packs. This was the material that was provided to BAML on a weekly basis and at the monthly governance meetings.

114. When the Claimant first started in his role, the material had been collated by another team. That team had been disbanded around six months after his arrival. Although the person responsible for preparing the material had held a handover / training session with both Mr Short and the Claimant, the Claimant had taken on responsibility for the GSM packs ever since. He had worked at weekends to do this. He also did it while he was on leave in December 2020, and as can be seen from above, raised this as a concern to Ms Harding when they were exchanging emails about Mr Lawrence.

115. At the beginning of January 2021, the Claimant emailed Mr Short to say he did not have time to do the pack that month. This led to exchanges of emails involving Ms Naylor, Mr Bayliss-Stranks and Ms Harding. Mr Short said he was unable to help without training as he had not been involved in the preparation of the materials and the handover session had taken place over 18 months earlier.

116. In one email sent on 6 January 2021, the Claimant said simply “I would suggest Paul follow the work instruction and if he has questions I will answer.” Mr Short began his reply in a confrontational way by challenging how engaged the Claimant must have been in a meeting they were both attending, if he was sending emails during it. He then went on to say that he considered that the preparation of the GSM report was an administrative task which needed “to be handed over properly with contacts at both locations so that [the First Respondent] have cover for holiday and sickness.” He added, “I would suggest Aqueel that if you stopped doing tickets yourself and managed the team, then you would have time to handover correctly. I have never completed this report myself.” (1,000)

117. Ms Naylor asked the Claimant to arrange the suggested handover, but he was reluctant to do so. This was discussed in emails sent over the weekend of 9 and 10 January 2021. The Claimant’s email in response to being asked by Ms Naylor to meet for one hour to go through the work required, was a one line email saying, “Meeting to show how to cut and paste into Powerpoint?” This led to Ms Harding intervening. Ms Naylor emailed Ms Harding to thank her for her intervention and added, “It’s getting to the point where he seems to be deliberately obstructive on pretty much every topic” (443 – 448 and 481-487).

118. Our finding is that this problem was created by the Claimant taking the task of producing the GSM packs on himself exclusively from the beginning. The crisis he complained about in January 2021, could have been avoided if he had taken the time to train a team member to support him earlier, particularly bearing in mind that the role was largely administrative. In addition, the Claimant’s expectation that Mr Short could pick the task up without any handover was entirely unrealistic.

Informal PIP

119. As a result of concerns being raised with her about the Claimant, Ms Harding had begun seeking advice from HR about him for a while before she started in her role. The advice was provided by Caroline Cooney, Employee Relations and HR Lead for the UK and Ireland. They exchanged emails on 7 December 2020 and set up a meeting to discuss the best approach to address the concerns that had been raised at that stage. On 10 December 2022, Ms Harding forwarded the appraisals Mr Shields had completed for the Claimant, to Ms Cooney. In her cover email she said: “Here you go Caroline…this will be tough as his feedback is very good – Graeme does call out his management style” (347)

120. Ms Harding told the tribunal that she did not write this email with the aim of trying to get rid of the Claimant. What she anticipated being tough was getting through to the Claimant to make him understand where he needed to improve his performance. From around this point forward she began to fill in a case tracker of all instances when she perceived of poor behaviour by the Claimant. The tracker template was provided to Ms Harding by Ms Cooney. The completed tracker was used later in the disciplinary proceedings against him (462 – 464).

121. Having decided that she needed to address the Claimant’s performance with him, Ms Harding invited the Claimant to a meeting to discuss her concerns. On 8 January 2021, she sent two zoom meeting invites. The first was to Ms Cooney and was sent at 12:39 that day. It invited Ms Cooney to a short meeting between 15:20 and 15:30 that same day with the message, “Lets take 10 mins – Just want to update you and set a slot for a PIP discussion for next week.” (1766)

122. The second zoom invite email was sent at 15:35 to the Claimant and Ms Cooney and invited them to a zoom call on 13 January between 14:30 and 15:30. The invite contained the following message: “I need to ask you to please join a call to discuss some areas of concern in your performance. Ms Cooney will also participate in the call” (548)

123. The Claimant did not receive the email containing the invite until 11 January 2021 at 14:28 (1765).

124. Earlier that day, 11 January 2021, at 12:14, the Claimant had forwarded the email exchange concerning the GSM deck to Ms Cooney and her line manager in HR, Debbie Irish. He sent it with a cover email raising concerns about Ms Naylor and Ms Harding’s conduct towards him. Specifically, he complained that Ms Harding was micromanaging him and undermining his authority when it came to leave requests involving his team and her authorising people to work from home. He also complained that the level of reporting required of him was proving to be a heavy burden and adding to his already heavy workload that required him to work evening and weekends. He also mentioned that he had been told to expect some feedback by BAM back in October 2020, but had not been given it and that he felt Mr Short was also working against him (495).

125. Debbie Irish replied to the email at 14:24. She sent the reply on behalf of herself and Ms Cooney as Ms Cooney was away from the office that day. Having reviewed the email exchange, she recommended that the Claimant talk to Ms Naylor and Ms Harding about his concerns in the first instance. When the Claimant replied to say that “I’m afraid Nicola and Corrie are the problem” she sent a further email noting that she was aware that Ms Harding had scheduled a meeting with the Claimant where she intended to discuss the full situation with him, including her perspective on events. She added: “I appreciate you have stated that you see [Ms Harding] and [Ms Naylor] as being a problem but as [Ms Harding] is your manager it is very important that you hear what she has to say and of course you will also be able to express your concerns, issues and asks. From what I can see this is a reasonable approach and a necessary first step towards addressing concerns, which will hopefully enable you to understand the situation. I don’t know the detail of the discussion and of course I cannot pre-empt the outcome, but if after manager engagement you ultimately still feel that there is an issue not addressed, do please reach out to [Ms Cooney] or me and we can talk about how best to proceed.” (494)

126. Unsurprisingly, given that he received the invite to the meeting a couple of hours after he had sent his email to HR, the Claimant assumed that his email to HR had triggered the meeting of 13 January 2021. He assumed Ms Harding would be aware of what he had said in his email. However, neither Ms Irish nor Ms Cooney shared the Claimant’s email with Ms Harding. This meant that when the meeting with the Claimant took place, Ms Harding was unaware that the Claimant had complained about her to HR.

127. From Ms Harding’s perspective, she treated the meeting as the start of an informal PIP process under the First Respondent’s Capability Process, section 7 (116). She did not use this terminology with the Claimant. However, we find that from what she had said in her email invite, it should have been clear to him that she was concerned about his performance.

128. No notes were made of the discussions at the meeting, but both Ms Harding and the Claimant confirmed in their evidence to the Tribunal they believed it was a constructive meeting. At the meeting, Ms Harding spoke about her plan for future meetings between her and the Claimant, some of which would include Ms Cooney.

129. Following the meeting, the Claimant sent the first follow up email to Ms Harding (copying in Ms Cooney) to apologise for his lack of response to her requests and saying that he would work with her “100% now that we’ve had a good discussion”. In his email to Ms Harding, he said that he did not feel that Ms Cooney would need to attend future meetings between them (550). Although he had been given the option by Ms Irish to raise any residual issues with her or Ms Cooney after his meeting with Ms Harding, he did not feel the need to do so.

130. Ms Harding replied to the Claimant’s follow up email with her own follow up. In it she thanked the Claimant and outlined the next steps, which included setting up two calls a week, one of which would be to cover “performance review topics” and the second to discuss ordinary day to day operational matters. She said that Ms Cooney would continue to be involved.

131. Ms Harding did not expressly refer to the ongoing performance review meetings being undertaken in accordance with the Capability Procedure. The meetings were different and separate to business as usual meetings, however. Ms Harding described the purpose of the meetings as being for “performance review” however, and wanted Ms Cooney to be present.

132. Ms Harding also said in her email that she felt, “We have a real opportunity to support the Bank and HP together going forward on a united front. I think we had a really good discussion today”. She concluded saying: …”Here’s to new beginnings.” (550).

133. On 22 January 2021, Ms Harding had a performance review call with the Claimant. She reported back to Ms Cooney that the call had been a “reasonable” one. She noted that she had briefly challenged the Claimant about the messaging into BAML around remote working and intended to pick this up again with him.

134. Despite the Claimant apologising for not attending meetings convened by Ms Harding, he continued to do this. For example, he missed a staff meeting that she held on 25 January 2021. He did not let her know in advance that he was not going to be able to attend the meeting and only apologised for and explained his absence (which was for a good reason) later when she emailed to ask him why he had not been there (694).

135. The issue of the rota for on-site presence was not resolved by the end of January. As far as Ms Harding was concerned, the Claimant had still not sent her a satisfactory rota for discussion and agreement. Her evidence to the tribunal was that he never sent her one.

Objectives

136. The Claimant and Mr Short were required to send Ms Harding suggested objectives for 2021 for the purposes of their appraisals. They both sent her suggestions on 25 January 2021, which was slightly later than she had asked. The objectives they had each identified were strikingly similar, being largely based on the ones from the previous year.

137. In his cover email, the Claimant apologised for the lateness and said, “Goals attached.” Ms Harding replied on 27 January at 08:30, “Lets discuss in your one to one…I would like to avoid having your normal day job as part of your goals – it should be areas of stretch or areas that need issues resolving” (991).

138. In his cover email, Mr Short apologised for the lateness and said, “This is what I have so far, some elements still need fleshing out.” Ms Harding replied to him on 27 January 2021 at 08:37 (seven minutes after replying to the Claimant) saying, “Looks great Paul, no need to apologise. Please go ahead and upload and we can discuss in your next 1 to 1.” (705)

139. The Claimant highlighted this to the Tribunal as an example of a difference in the way she was treating him to Mr Short.

Feedback from BAML (26 January 2021)

140. The monthly governance meeting for January was held with BAML on 26 January 2021. Following the meeting Ms Naylor reported on some key points that had arisen to Ms Harding. She also observed that during the meeting Mr Lee Hill had sent her several WhatsApp messages. According to Ms Naylor, Mr Hill raised the following concerns:

(1) That the Claimant did not appear to grasp that the First Respondent was on track with the Refresh plans to update BAML computers because the volume was spread across the year and split into quarters. Mr Hill expressed concern that the Claimant should not be seeking to run ahead of the plan because of the lease dates on the equipment.

(2) The Claimant was closing a high volume of break/fix tickets personally, although Mr Hill was not sure if this was because the Claimant was doing the actual fix work or just completing the tickets for the engineers.

Ms Naylor also mentioned a concern of her own saying:

“Lastly, there is a section on the deck where positive feedback is shared. To be honest it was a little embarrassing today because most of the feedback that [the Claimant] had put was about himself, the bank’s comments on how great he is. It came across as [the Claimant] showing everyone how great he is showing everyone else up. Maybe I’m wrong and I don’t know what could be done easily, but I think we need to be careful that it is not turned into the Aqueel show, especially when we have the current issues.” (692)

141. Ms Naylor spoke to Mr Hill after the meeting. Mr Hill raised a number of concerns about the Claimant with Ms Naylor. She summarised these in an email dated 28 January 2021 to Ms Harding and Mr Bayliss-Stranks as follows: “Performance is great but overall concerned about who is doing what because [the Claimant] seems to be doing everything himself:

• No refresh lead, Alberto was not replaced. [The Claimant] still does not understand the full requirements, process, etc In meetings sometimes it’s as if he is still new or seeing date for the first time, cannot answer
• Large proportion of [break/fix] tickets done by him
• Apparent power/control issues, no trust in the team and there are conflicts.
• He still does not know how everything works and does not use the team, so there is a dependency on someone who was not fully aware.
• When he was off for 2 weeks before Christmas everything worked extremely well – specifically the BCP work in Camberley – however he heard from some of the team that he was still checking in with them daily
• The team sometimes go to [Mr Biggs] to complain about [the Claimant] and [Mr Biggs] tells them to talk to [the Claimant] himself, [Mr Bayliss- Stranks] or me because he cannot get involved. The only positive, he said, is that the Claimant is super responsive – when the bank asked for something he does it immediately” (711). Re-Tender Process

142. BAML began the process of putting the contract for IT services out for tender on 31 January 2021. It issued a request for proposals (RFP) to all IT vendors it was currently using, setting out its requirements, and asked for proposals by 19 March 2021. BAML’s wanted the new contract to commence on 1 August 2021.

143. The First Respondent has a specific team that deals with tenders called the Pursuit Team. The Pursuit Team put together a team to work on its RFP. The team included the Customer Success Manager (Ms Naylor) and the Account Delivery Manager (Mr Bayliss-Stranks) as it was the First Respondent’s standard practice to include the people who held these roles in the team preparing the RFP. In addition, the First Respondent decided to ask Mr Short and another individual, Colin Patterson, who reported to Mr Short to participate in some meetings to assist with the process as ‘subject matter experts’. Three meetings took place to which Mr Short and Mr Patterson were invited in February 2021. There were many more meetings to discuss the RFP, however, and overall the input of Mr Short and Mr Patterson into the RFP process was limited.

144. The First Respondent told us that Mr Short was asked to participate because he was a long serving employee (18 years) who had been working on the BAML contract for many years and had been through a previous tender. Mr Patterson was invited to assist because he was the Print and Process specialist. He was also a long serving employee on the BAML contract with experience of a previous tender.

145. The Claimant was informed that the RFP process had begun on 1 February 2021 (732), but he was not asked to participate as a ‘subject matter expert’. He was not told that Mr Short and Mr Patterson had been asked to be ‘subject matter experts’ but later became aware that they had attended some meetings to do with the RFP to which he was not invited.

Concerns in February 2021

146. In the meantime, on 2 February 2021, the Claimant had emailed Mr Biggs and asked for his assistance with unloading 15 crates of equipment on site. Mr Biggs did not reply and instead complained to Mr Short in an email sent just to him that the Claimant had first tried to get Mr Lawrence to do this work and then asked him despite having a team of engineers on site and despite it not being an urgent task. Mr Biggs said in his email to Mr Short: “I’m not going to site just to move boxes, when he has a full team of

engineers, I’ve not even replied…..” (727)

147. Mr Short forwarded the email on to Ms Harding saying that the Claimant was continuing to harass people to come to site despite their fears and safety concerns. He added: “It appears to me that [the Claimant] has still not had a conversation/meeting with the team to properly understand what his teams capability is. It reads to me that [the Claimant] will not be happy until he has everyone on site and has his own way.” (726 - 727)

148. Mr Biggs sent Ms Harding a lengthy complaint about the Claimant’s management style shortly after this (739 – 743).

149. On 5 February 2021, Ms Tolhurst sent Ms Naylor a lengthy email raising eight separate concerns about the Claimant. These ranged from him being seen as not approachable and team morale being low to concerns about his lack of communication and not having the correct staffing levels in place to deal with potential sickness, emergencies and workload increase. Ms Tolhurst asked that her email be treated as confidential (734). Ms Naylor shared the email with Ms Harding.

150. On 9 February 2021, Ms Naylor emailed Ms Harding to inform her that she had just done the revised forecast for income from the BAML contract for Q2. She said that the forecast had had to be reduced by over $300,000 because the Claimant had previously over-estimated the volume of Refresh work that would be required (746). They arranged to discuss the issue further. Ms Harding replied to say that she would “also bring in HR as think we need immediate suspension from [the First Respondent] and BAML view now” (745).

151. Ms Harding told the Tribunal that it was at this point that she began to think there was a need suspend the Claimant to enable a disciplinary investigation to take place. This was because she did not feel he was responding to the informal PIP. Before finalising her decision, however she wanted to take soundings from various people, including Ms Naylor. Ms Naylor’s view was the situation with the Claimant seemed to be getting worse, but she was worried what BAML would think about a change in SDM (745).

152. Ms Harding decided to arrange a meeting with Mr Hill and his colleague Lesley Davies to talk through the issues with him and to get BAML’s perspective. The meeting took place on 12 February 2021. Although no note was taken of the discussion at the meeting, Ms Harding sent two follow-up emails that same day which we consider to be an accurate summary of what was discussed.

153. In her first email, sent to Mr Hill and Ms Davies, Ms Harding thanked them for their time and honest and frank feedback. She then summarised in bullet points some issues that required her urgent attention and said she would build a plan to action/rectify them (759). It is relevant to note that the points raised included the following:

• A need for the First Respondent to follow the defined process of management for all aspects of the service at all times
• A requirement for better management of the stock sheet in order for it to be a reliable, accurate source for stock management, forecasting and refresh
• Executing cases at speed is not always the most effective way. The SLA defined delivery times are there to provide a framework of expectation for the customer
• a need for a Refresh Lead
• the SDM should not be working on Break / Fix incidents
• the London team need to be trusted to complete their work and an improved team morale should be encouraged to drive better teamwork on site
• the SDM should follow the governance of Mr Hill as the primary contact with escalations into [Mr Bayliss-Stranks] and [Ms Naylor] when necessary (758-759).

154. Ms Harding discussed the issues that had arisen with Ms Naylor and Mr Bayliss-Stranks. Following the discussion, she forwarded the email to Ms Vandenbroucke and updated her on the current position as she understood it follows: “Good conversation with the bank today. They raised all the points below – but do not want to change the SDM was going through an RFP, so I agreed to try and rectify as much of the issues as possible. They were appreciative of my engagement as they said they had not had a point of escalation for the operational team before (outside of Corrie, CSM and Simon, ADM) and felt very reassured after our conversation. My next steps will be to take [the Claimant] through these points next week. It was decided not to make it a formal PIP or disciplinary at this point by the business leads on the account as it is far too much of a risk to the RFP. If [the Claimant] reacts badly to such action. This also does not cover the numerous allegations from the team and our suppliers, but is just the banks issues. This will have to go on the backburner whilst we run the RFP.” (758).

155. Ms Vandenbroucke replied saying: “Nicola, you tried, and lets keep monitoring under close scrutiny until you can get him out.” (758)

156. On 15 February 2021, Ms Harding spoke to the Claimant about the feedback she had received from BAML.

157. She then emailed Ms Naylor and Mr Bayliss-Stranks saying that at first the Claimant had been very defensive in their meeting, but that she believed she had brought him round to the thinking that they had to act on these requests and show BAML how they were making moves to improve whilst in the middle of an RFP. She added that the Claimant had said that he did not agree with any of the points, but nevertheless agreed to help with a response.

158. She then sent the Claimant a follow-up email copying in Ms Naylor and Mr Bayliss-Stranks. In the email she set out the areas of improvement that she had captured from the meeting and noted that the Claimant had “kindly agreed to think about steps” he could take. She also asked Ms Naylor and Mr Bayliss-Stranks in the body of the email, if there was anything that could be done from their side to address the concerns. She said that she was required to update Mr Hill the following Friday and emphasised in bold in the email that “We must remain 100% consistent in our communication with the Bank across the [First Respondent] team, particularly whilst in the RFP process” (760).

159. As a personal follow-up to the email from Ms Harding, Mr Bayliss-Stranks emailed the Claimant saying, “As always I’m keen to support you and the team on this as much as I can from afar.” (763) The Claimant invited the tribunal to interpret this email as demonstrating that there was a culture of fear within the First Respondent. Our finding is that this email was sent by Mr Bayliss-Stranks to the Claimant to reinforce Ms Harding’s message and to offer the Claimant help. The reference to helping from afar was made because Mr Bayliss-Stranks was working from home, and not because Mr Bayliss-Stranks was too scared to openly support the Claimant.

160. On 17 February 2021, the Claimant provided a detailed written reply to the points in Ms Harding’s email. Rather than propose solutions to all the points, he defended him position in relation to many of them.

161. For example, he did not accept that there was an issue with him working on Break/Fix incidents saying that how resource is allocated should not be BAML’s concern. He added that he had only been responsible for 20 out of 160 incidents in the recent month.

162. He also said that he thought it was as odd time for the bank to ask for a new Refresh lead. According to his witness evidence, and in direct contradiction to the instructions given to him by Ms Harding, the Claimant asked Mr Hill about this directly. This was because he thought that his managers wanted a different person to be in charge of Refresh to avoid him getting good feedback.

163. With regard to team morale, the Claimant commented: “I have no idea where the Bank got this …. form, the low morale has been there from well before I joined. I assume this is directed to the four B/F engineers, two of whom had the best bonuses ever but that hasn’t helped with their motivation. The two long term absentees shows that there is an issue. Vasi has made no secret of his desire to leave but hasn’t found anything for the past two years to move on to. The team has to be managed, they are not at the level that can work autonomously.”

164. He was also defensive about the points concerning governance. He defended the act that he had been communicating directly with Mr Van Rooyen rather than Mr Hill, blaming in part the fact that Mr Hill was working from home.

165. Ms Harding sought advice from HR as to how to respond. In her view, the list had been actions that the Claimant had been asked to pick-up, rather than debate and she considered he was failing to carry out her reasonable instructions. Ms Cooney shared Ms Harding’s view (778).

Chromebooks and Print Tickets

166. A further issue arose on 17 February 2021. It involved how the First Respondent’s team should respond in the case of problems with Chromebooks issued to BAML staff that were under warranty. Despite it being agreed that all that should happen is that faulty Chromebooks should be sent to HP for warranty repair and if beyond economical repair written off, the Claimant wanted to make good devices from damaged written off devices. He repeatedly discussed this into early March 2021 with BAML staff despite being no-one else agreeing to this (898-899).

167. At around the same time, another issue came to light. BAML queried an increase in the volume of ‘tickets’ for printer repairs, particularly as so few of its staff were actually working on-site at the time. It transpired that a significant number of these were generated not by BAML staff reporting faults, but by a member of the Claimant’s team. The reason for this was because the Claimant had asked the photocopying engineer to undertake proactive fixes, via monitoring, rather than wait for users to log faults. The Claimant had not informed Mr Bayliss-Stranks or Ms Naylor that he was doing this. This meant that BAML had been charged for these tickets even though they had not generated them.

168. The Claimant’s defence to this accusation was that he had asked Mr Hill at BAML for permission to raise proactive tickets in his own name or that of his engineer. He acknowledged that the client should not have been charged for this work. however. He told the Tribunal he said that the “root cause of the billing issue was allowing Russell Lawrence to work from home.”

169. The Claimant messaged Mr Hill to ask him if he recalled when he had asked him if it was acceptable for the First Respondent to raise incidents for protective printer faults like paper jams. Mr Hill recalled that he had confirmed that it was. His exact words were: “go for it But every effort should be made for users to raise themselves But if one of the team spots a jam that is different” (804)

170. Several calls were held to get to the bottom of this issue towards the end of February. Mr Patterson was asked to be involved because he was the Print specialist. Mr Patterson was of the view that there was absolutely no justification for the proactive fixes via monitoring to have been undertaken. His view was that sending test prints to a device that has not printed for a year was bound to cause paper jams because the paper had been sitting in the trays for so long. In defending his actions, the Claimant questioned Mr Patterson’s expertise. This led to Ms Harding organising a zoom call to discuss the issue on 24 February 2021.

171. The Claimant alleges that during the call Mr Patterson called him “slopey shouldered.” Ms Harding told us that she did not hear this particular comment being said. We find that Mr Patterson did make the comment. We find it unlikely that the Claimant misremembered this. Our finding is that the context in which he said it was accusing the Claimant of not bearing responsibility for the issues that had arisen. We do not find that Ms Harding was lying to the Tribunal, however. We consider that she either did not hear the comment, or did hear it and did not appreciate its significance and so has forgotten she heard it.

172. Having established the source of the issue with the printer tickets, the First Respondent decided that it needed to be transparent with BAML about the fact that it had been overcharged (840). Ms Harding also decided that she should suspended the Claimant. She had a conversation with Mr Elliott about this who confirmed that he agreed that if suspension was justified it should take place. In addition, both Ms Naylor and Mr Bayliss-Stranks were of the view that the Claimant should be suspended.

Purported Whistleblowing

173. On 26 February 2022, a team meeting of the HP staff working on the BAML contract was held at which the RFP process was briefly discussed. The Claimant understood Ms Harding to suggest that the First Respondent could seek to influence the Second Respondent’s choice to submit a proposal because of its own commercial relationship with the Second Respondent. The Tribunal makes no finding as to whether this understanding was correct. On or around 5 March 2021, the Claimant anonymously reported Ms Harding’s comments using the First Respondent’s website for reporting ethical concerns as a potential breach of the First Respondent’s Anti- Corruption Policy (851). No evidence was presented to the Tribunal that Ms Harding was ever made aware that the Claimant had done this.

March 2021 – Suspension

174. Ms Harding informed Ms Vandenbroucke of her thinking in relation to the Claimant’s suspension on 2 March 2021. In an email to Ms Vandenbroucke on that date, Ms Harding reported that “the HP Business Leads of BAML” had changed their position and were recommending that the Claimant be “removed from his position at the earliest opportunity”. She explained that the decision was being driven by the further issue having come to light, which she summarised as “Print tickets being raised by HP Engineers (as opposed to the user) under the direction of the Claimant despite being off process”. She said she would be liaising with HR the following day (872).

175. Ms Harding and Ms Cooney exchanged emails on 3 March 2021. Ms Harding sought Ms Cooney’s advice as to whether the concerns about the Claimant would justify his suspension. Ms Cooney replied that there appeared to be more than enough areas of concern which required serious attention (873).

176. On the same day, 3 March 2021, entirely separately from the suspension process, the Claimant and Mr Short had an email exchange about the preparation of a rota for Chester staff. The Claimant had prepared one for him and sent him this. In his reply to the Claimant, Mr Short was critical of the Claimant and said, “If you are stuck for jobs to do please get me the headcount and overtime report, this would have been a better use of your time.” (999)

177. Having decided to suspend the Claimant, Ms Naylor, Ms Harding and Mr Bayliss-Stranks met with Mr Hill to inform him. Ms Naylor also emailed Mr Dickens and Mr Van Rooyen on 8 March 2021 to inform them (912). BAML confirmed that they wished to shut off the Claimant’s access to his BAML email account and system during his suspension.

178. The suspension was implemented on 10 March 2021. On 9 March 2021, Ms Harding had asked the Claimant not to go into work but to remain at home and attend a video call with her. Ms Harding and Ms Cooney met with him and informed him he was being suspended on full pay and that his BAML access had been removed, but not his access to the First Respondent’s systems. Ms Harding read the Claimant a pre-prepared letter of suspension (933 - 936), that she subsequently sent him by email (932).

179. The letter said that the Claimant was being suspend from work until further notice while an investigation was carried out into several areas of serious concern. The letter contained further information about the areas of concerns. These were expressed to be:

• Accusations of bullying and harassment of many team members both HP and Contingent Workers – the letter stated that Ms Harding had received multiple complaints from HP employees in and outside the team and also from third parties related to CW staff that they have at times felt intimidated
• Refusal to adhere to defined BAML processes - the letter referred to five instances, which were said to be (1) issues with Refresh and the lack of a Refresh lead; (2) the Chromebook issue, (3) the Print Tickets issue,

(4) Ad Hoc requests, giving as an example the work done on setting u the Covid 19 test centre and (5) the Claimant’s failure to put in place a weekly Covid-19 situation on site rota

• Violation of safety – the letter referred to concerns about the Claimant’s attitude to mask wearing and disregard to requiring staff to travel to work on site on public transport
• Misrepresentation of HP to BAML management – the letter accused the Claimant of informing BAML management that HP staff had demanded to work from home when this was never the case.

180. The letter included a paragraph saying: “Your suspension does not mean that we have already decided that you have done or not done an action or behaviour that is misconduct or serious misconduct. We will not keep you suspended for longer than is necessary for us to carry out the investigation and decide on action to be taken, if appropriate. We can lift the suspension at any time.” (934)

181. The cover email reminded the Claimant that as the matter was under investigation, he should keep it confidential and not discuss it with his colleagues. He was also told not to contact anyone in BAML or at the First Respondent other than Ms Harding or Ms Cooney. The Claimant was asked to set up an out of office status on his email account stating that he was on a personal leave of absence. This was the message that was circulated among his team.

182. Arrangements were put in place to cover the Claimant’s work. These were led on the ground by Mr Biggs and overseen by Mr Short and Ms Harding.

183. On 11 March 2021, following an exchange of emails with Mr Biggs and Mr Short, Ms Harding reported back to NC, Mr Bayliss-Stranks and Mr Elliott that there was “Early success with keeping the plane flying.” Ms Naylor responded saying: “This is so good to read after everything over the past few weeks!!!

Thanks to you both, Simon and the new core team!” (945)

184. On 12 March 2021, Ms Tolhurst from IQUO Limited emailed Ms Naylor, Mr Biggs and Mr Short with the subject heading “Thank You.” In her email she said: “Following the change in management this week, I would like to take the opportunity to say thank you very much for your support personally and from an IQUO perspective. You have all been exceptionally understanding and trusting of the past few months with regards to the delicate situation concerning [the Claimant].” (954)

Claimant’s Grievance – March 2022

185. Following the Claimant’s suspension, Ms Harding began to collate the evidence that she had been collecting about the Claimant. She also drafted a letter which she intended to send the Claimant. She wrote the draft letter as if the investigation was completed in anticipation that it would be. She sent the draft letter to Ms Cooney on 15 March 2021 to get her assistance with it. In the draft letter, she said that the investigation had been concluded, with the outcome being that there were grounds for disciplinary action for gross misconduct and the Claimant would be invited to a disciplinary meeting where he would have the opportunity to respond to the allegations (956 – 959).

186. Ms Naylor was planning to finalise the investigation by 22 March 2021 and sent the Claimant a text on 19 March 2021 to confirm this to him (1362).

187. The Claimant took legal advice in connection with his suspension. On 19 March 2021, he submitted a grievance to Ms Cooney. It contained 21 complaints, including a complaint about his suspension and the ongoing investigation. The letter concluded saying “Since [Ms Harding] took over from [Ms Shields] my position has become, more difficult day by day to the point emails from [Ms Harding] and [Ms Naylor] have become a source of stress. I feel I can longer report to [Ms Harding]” The Claimant requested a written response to the grievance (965 – 976). He provided a number of documents as supporting evidence of his complaints (978 to 1031).

188. As a result of the grievance, Ms Harding ceased to have any involvement in the ongoing disciplinary process. Ms Cooney arranged for Peter Jolly, UK and Ireland Country Manager for Industrial Business to do two things: (1) investigate and consider the Claimant’s grievance and separately; (2) review whether it was right for the Claimant to have been suspended and say if he recommended the matter should proceed to a disciplinary hearing. Ms Cooney supported Mr Jolly with these steps.

189. Mr Jolly was from a completely different part of the first Respondent’s business and did not know the Claimant at all. He knew of Ms Harding, but had never met her or worked with her.

190. In terms of the process he followed, Mr Jolly first met with Mr Shields to gain his insight into the issues (1761). He then invited the Claimant to a grievance meeting which took place by video call on 9 April 2021. The Claimant was accompanied by a colleague, James Jessop. The meeting lasted for an hour and ten minutes. Notes of the meeting were taken by a note taker and were contained in the bundle (1111-1119).