RESERVED JUDGMENT

1. The claimant’s claims numbers 2218131/2024 and 6008104/2024 are unsuccessful and are dismissed.

REASONS

Introduction

1. This case is about the claimant’s probationary employment with the respondent between 1 September 2023 and 5 June 2024, on which date the respondent says it was terminated for a failure of probation relating to performance and conduct issues. The claimant contends that she was subjected to discrimination throughout her employment, and that the termination of her employment was the culmination of a campaign of victimisation against her after raising grievances and raising the first claim. The claimant issued proceedings in claim number 2218131/2024 on 10 April 2024 (“First Claim”), and in claim number 6008104/2024 on 9 August 2024. The claimant brings the following complaints:

First Claim

1.1 Direct race discrimination
1.2 Direct age discrimination
1.3 Harassment related to race
1.4 Harassment related to age
1.5 Victimisation Second Claim
1.6 Direct race discrimination
1.7 Direct disability discrimination
1.8 Direct sex discrimination
1.9 Failure to make reasonable adjustments
1.10 Victimisation
1.11 Wrongful dismissal / breach of contract The hearing

2. The hearing was initially listed as a ten day hearing. Due to judicial availability it was then reduced to nine days, and the Tribunal could not sit on two further days. As a result, it was not possible to complete the hearing in the remaining time allocated. The Tribunal therefore arranged further days for deliberations and it was agreed that a reserved judgment on liability would be sent to the parties.

3. We received a bundle of documents, a supplemental bundle, and witness statements from the claimant, and for the respondent Ms Rachel Smith, Mr Derek Coombes, Mr Philip North, Ms Tinu Saide, Ms Catherine Sparkes and Mrs Naomi Ramsay (ne Schweitzer).

4. The first day of the hearing was allocated as a reading day and the parties did not attend. Due to judicial availability on that day, some further time for reading was required on the second day of the hearing.

5. At the outset of the second day of the hearing we discussed whether any reasonable adjustments would be required. The claimant indicated that she suffered from menopausal symptoms including brain fog. It was offered that breaks could be taken whenever required, in addition to the mid-morning, lunchtime and mid-afternoon breaks already scheduled. The claimant did avail herself of this on a few occasions, including to give her time to consider particular issues and how to proceed in her cross examination of the respondent’s witnesses. She was also permitted to use a stress ball. On the respondent’s side it was indicated that two witnesses also need additional breaks, though in the end none were requested during the course of their evidence.

6. The parties had not agreed a timetable in advance of the hearing, and the claimant could not give an indication how long she might need to question the respondent’s witnesses. We therefore took an indication from Ms Mellor as to how long she might require to cross examine the claimant, and during the break for further tribunal reading we constructed a timetable which, in our experience, would give a fair allocation of time to each side and ensure that evidence and submissions would be concluded by day 7. The timetable was agreed with both parties.

7. We dealt with a number of outstanding applications:

7.1 The claimant applied for respondent’s counsel to be recused from presenting the respondent in the proceedings on the basis that she sat as a fee-paid Employment Judge and this gave rise to a conflict of interest or bias. The Tribunal is not in a position to ask Counsel to recuse themselves, as this is a matter for Counsel. Had there been any prior relationship between Ms Mellor and any of the panel then that might have given rise to a recusal of the Judge or a Member. However, we were entirely satisfied that no issue of conflict of interest or bias arose, none of the Tribunal having interacted at all with Ms Mellor previously, and Ms Mellor sitting in a different area of England and Wales. Ms Mellor also confirmed that she had no prior interaction with Employment Judge McDonald who had dealt with the previous case management hearing, the discussion at which and the assistance Ms Mellor gave the Judge in that hearing having been the basis for the application. We were satisfied that there had been no conflict of interest at that hearing either, and that nothing arose from the interaction described. It was explained to the claimant that it is perfectly normal for a Judge at a case management hearing, or indeed at a final hearing, to seek assistance from Counsel to explain the procedural background to a case where the other side is unrepresented.
7.2 The claimant applied under Rule 49 for certain information to be excluded from any written judgment. The information appeared to be relevant to remedy rather than liability, and in those circumstances we considered the application might be revisited at that point, if necessary.
7.3 The claimant applied for a witness order in respect of her former line manager, Ms Nina Taylor, so that she could cross examine her. That application was refused. It was explained to the claimant that if she applied for a witness order for a witness, she would be calling that witness and would not then be able to cross examine that witness. It was generally in her favour if the respondent did not call a key witness, as that witness would not then be present to challenge the claimant’s evidence as to their interactions. In any event, the respondent gave a reasonable explanation at the hearing as to why Ms Taylor had not given evidence.

8. We heard oral evidence from all witnesses.

9. During the claimant’s cross examination of the respondent’s witnesses assistance was given to frame questions (which were often expressed as multiple questions at once) and guidance given on multiple occasions as to the need for questions to be relevant to the list of issues and the need to put the claimant’s case as set out in the list of issues in full to each witness as was relevant to them. The legal tests in respect of direct discrimination and victimisation in particular were explained more than once and the claimant was reminded that if she considered a witness had done something because of race, age etc or because a grievance had been raised, that needed to be put to them. No criticism is made of the claimant in this regard, as she is a litigant in person. We record the matter here for completeness as, despite the guidance given and repeated opportunities to put further questions, there were a number of areas in the list of issues the claimant did not explore at all in her questions.

10. During the course of Mr North’s evidence, the claimant asked questions about excerpts from a policy he had referred to which did not match the version of the policy which had been disclosed by the respondent and included in the bundle. This was a document the claimant had previously asked for. Mr North indicated in answer that he had cut and paste parts of the policy which could be found on the intranet, and that the respondent should be able to provide a copy. As the respondent has a continuing duty of disclosure, Ms Mellor was asked to make enquiries to see whether the correct document could be located. The document was located and provided after the claimant had finished her cross examination. The claimant was permitted time to consider the relevant extract and asked additional questions about it.

11. We received written submissions from both parties. The claimant was given guidance to follow the list of issues in preparing her submissions, but did not do so. Indeed, her submissions did not mention direct discrimination at all, and included lengthy sections on unfair dismissal and procedural fairness, when there is no unfair dismissal complaint. In relation to disability the claimant provided a 2021 paper entitled ‘Menopause and the Workplace: Call for Evidence – Response from the Employment Lawyers Association’. We considered this document but did not find it of assistance in assessing the issues specific to the claimant in the second claim. The claimant provided a separate document in relation to her breach of contract complaint. Part of that document related to an allegation of automatically unfair dismissal under section 103A Employment Rights Act 1996 (whistleblowing) and/or under section 27 Equality Act 2010 (victimisation). The victimisation claim is already included in the list of issues under that heading, however there is no claim for automatic unfair dismissal and we did not consider the same.

12. We have considered all the written and oral evidence and the documentary evidence in the bundle to which we were referred and the submissions made to us, where relevant to the list of issues. If we do not mention a particular fact or dispute in this judgment, it does not mean we have not taken it into account, only that it is not material to our conclusions. We have referred at points to excerpts of documents, however we have read each document referred to in full. All our findings of fact are made on the balance of probabilities. Our decision was unanimous.

The Issues

13. A list of issues was agreed at a hearing before Employment Judge Clark on 13 March 2025. It is apparent that some time was spent at that hearing attempting to finalise a list of issues, however it appeared to the Tribunal that there was still clarification required. The list of issues was discussed at the outset of the hearing and further information was sought from both parties. The claimant indicated she was not pursuing issue 7(f), which is struck through to maintain the paragraph numbering. It was noted that the complaint of breach of contract was an unusual one and submissions would be required from the claimant as to the basis on which this was a complaint the Tribunal could hear. On that basis that complaint was left in the list as it was. A final list of issues was produced as follows:

First Claim – 2218131/2024

Time limits

1. On 23 February 2024, the Claimant contacted ACAS. On 20 March 2024, ACAS issued its EC Certificate. On 10 April 2024, the Claimant presented her ET1. Complaints about conduct that took place on or before 23 November 2023 may not have been brought in time.

2. Were the Claimant’s Equality Act 2010 complaints based on conduct which occurred on or before 23 November 2023?

3. If yes, did the relevant conduct form part of conduct extending over a period of time in respect of which the Claimant presented a timely ET1 at the end of the period?

4. If not, is it just and equitable to extend time?

Direct age/race discrimination (s.13 Equality Act 2010)

5. The Claimant’s age group is 55 and over. She compares her treatment to the Respondent’s treatment of people aged 39-50.

6. The Claimant relies on the following protected characteristics of race:

(i) skin colour – black (ii) national/ethnic origin – black Caribbean. The Claimant does not rely upon citizenship. Her comparators are white skinned of British/European national/ethnic origin.

7. Did the Respondent do the following things:

a) On or around 1 October 2023, Rachel Smith (Claimant’s line manager) gave the Claimant a baseless ‘inconsistent’ performance rating on month one
b) On or around 27 December 2023, Rachel Smith took 5 weeks to send the Claimant’s three-month probationary review to the Claimant (it should have been sent on 29 November 2023)
c) Rachel Smith added unrealistic objectives to that three- month probationary review
d) On or around 21 December 2023, Rachel Smith and Nina Taylor placed the Claimant on a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP) which included unmeasurable items, biased items with no evidence
e) On 21 December 2023, Nina Taylor gave the Claimant unachievable unrealistic and not SMART objectives in the PIP
f) Nina Taylor and Rachel Smith denied the Claimant training which other colleagues were allowed to go on
(i) 4-6 December 2023 - a 3-day workday training event (Ryan Cartwright attended)
g) The Respondent offered work to others which it did not offer to the Claimant.
(i) On 29-30 November 2023 – Nina Taylor offered ‘ownership of modules’ work to Anna Beck but not the Claimant.
h) On or around 21 December 2023, Nina Taylor and Rachel Smith gave the Claimant objectives to complete in order to pass her probation objectives which they gave to other members of staff (including Jonathan Lomas, Ryan Cartwright) as just regular system housekeeping month-to-month business with no measures
i) Nina Taylor and Rachel Smith wrongly stated in the Claimant’s PIP that she received bad stakeholder feedback when in fact she had received good stakeholder feedback (from Maggie Swindon) (comparators Ryan Cartwright, Jonathan Lomas). Nina Taylor and Rachel Smith included the negative feedback on the PIP which was the first time the claimant was made aware of it and was not given a chance to respond prior as the person that gave the negative feedback was never revealed so she could not give her side of actual events The positive stakeholder feedback from Maggie Swinden (Stakeholder) was never considered in the claimant’s favour.
j) On or around 21 December 2023, Nina Taylor and Rachel Smith queried the Claimant’s job application
k) Around 7 December 2023, Derek Coombes (higher manager) shared the Claimant’s health information with Rachel Smith without the Claimant’s consent.

8. If the conduct occurred, did the Respondent thereby treat the Claimant less favorably than it did treat the following comparators (all are comparators for each allegation, save where individual comparators are specified):

a) Age Comparator:
a. Ryan Cartwright
b. Jonathan Lomas
c. Anna Beck
b) Race Comparators
a. Ryan Cartwright
b. Jonathan Lomas
c. Anna Beck
d. Andrew Wilson
c) Claimant also relies upon a hypothetical white British comparator aged 39-50.

9. If the treatment was because of the Claimant’s age, was the treatment a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim? The Respondent will say its legitimate aims were:

a) The requirement for all employees to successfully complete the probationary period
b) The requirement for all employees to adhere to the Probationary Policy
c) The requirement for all new employees to be subject to the same Talent Grid Assessment
d) The health, safety, and wellbeing of all employees
e) The requirement for all employees to have 2+ years’ workday Configuration experience and to evidence this in a reasonable time or following a reasonable management request

10. In deciding the issue of proportionality, the Tribunal will consider:

a) Was the treatment an appropriate and reasonably necessary way to achieve one or more legitimate aim
b) Could something less discriminatory have been done instead
c) The balancing of the needs of the Claimant and the Respondent. Harassment related to age or race (s.26 Equality Act 2010)

11. Did the Respondent do the following things:

a) On 11 December 2023, Rachel Smith questioned the Claimant about her health via MS Teams based on the information concerning the Claimant’s health which Derek Coombes had wrongly shared with her

12. If the conduct occurred, was it unwanted by the Claimant?

13. Did the conduct relate to the Claimant’s age or race?

14. Was the purpose or effect of the conduct (taking into account her perception, the other circumstances of the case, and whether it was reasonable for the conduct to have that effect)

a) To violate the Claimant’s dignity
b) To create an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant? Victimisation (s.27 Equality Act 2010)

15. Did the Claimant do a protected act as follows:

a) Claimant’s grievance submitted 17 January 2024
b) Claimant’s grievance submitted 17 May 2024 The respondent accepts these are protected acts.

16. Did the Respondent do the following things:

a) After her return to work from sick leave on 2 February 2023:
i. Derek Coombes did not allow the Claimant to resume her role, do her normal work, or attend pre-planned meetings
ii. Derek Coombes did not permit the Claimant to attend business meetings within her role and job description
b) the Respondent did not provide a timely response or any response to the Claimant’s SARS request made around 21 March 2024
c) On 12 April 2024, Teams meeting attended by the Claimant and others was concluded, but Jonathan Lomas and Andrew Wilson restarted the meeting which went on for a further 43 minutes without the Claimant
d) The Claimant’s dismissal by Philip North on 5 June 2024
e) The Respondent paid the Claimant’s 5 weeks' notice pay late (it should have been paid on 5 June 2024)
f) The Respondent paid the Claimant’s 8 days holiday pay late (it should have been paid on 5 June 2024)
g) The Respondent did not investigate the Claimant’s second grievance
h) The Respondent did not follow its own probation policy and procedure in the following respect: the Claimant’s probation should have lasted 6 months, not 3 months.

17. By doing so, did the Respondent thereby subject the Claimant to a detriment?

18. If it did, did the Respondent subject the Claimant to the detriment because the Claimant had done one (or more) protected act?

Remedy

19. Should the Tribunal make a recommendation that the Respondent take steps to reduce any adverse effect on the claimant? What should it recommend?

20. What financial losses (if any) did the Respondent’s unlawful conduct cause the Claimant?

21. Has the Claimant taken reasonable steps to mitigate any loss arising from her dismissal?

22. For what period of loss should the Claimant be compensated?

23. Did the Respondent’s unlawful conduct injure the Claimant’s feelings – if yes, what is the appropriate award for that injury?

24. Did the Respondent’s unlawful conduct cause the Claimant to suffer a personal injury? If yes, what is the appropriate award for that personal injury?

25. Is there a chance the Claimant’s employment would have ended in any event? If yes, how great a chance?

26. Did the ACAS Code of Practice on Disciplinary and Grievance Procedures apply? If it did:

(i) Did the Respondent unreasonably fail to comply with it?
(ii) If they did, is it just and equitable to increase any award payable to the Claimant, and if so, by how much?

27. Is the Claimant entitled to interest on any award? If yes, how much?

Second claim – 6008104/2024

Time limits

1. On 5 August 2024, the Claimant contacted ACAS. On 20 8 August 2024, ACAS issued its EC Certificate. On 9 August 2024, the Claimant presented her ET1. Complaints about conduct that took place on or before 5 May 2024 may not have been brought in time (subject to any submissions in relation to the effect of the second ACAS certificate).

2. Were the Claimant’s Equality Act 2010 complaints based on conduct which occurred on or before 5 May 2023?

3. If yes, did the relevant conduct form part of conduct extending over a period of time in respect of which the Claimant presented a timely ET1 at the end of the period?

4. If not, is it just and equitable to extend time?

Disability

1. Was the Claimant disabled with the definition of s.6 Equality Act 2010, at the time of the events the claim is about specifically from 6 March 2024. The Tribunal will decide:

a) Did the Claimant have a physical or mental impairment? The Claimant relies on menopausal symptoms including brain fog, fatigue and mental health issues.
b) Would the impairment have had a substantial adverse effect on the Claimant’s ability to perform day to day activities without the treatment or other measures?
c) Did they last at least 12 months, or were they likely to last at least 12 months? if not, were they likely to recur?
d) Did the Respondent have knowledge of the Claimant’s disability? If not, ought the Respondent to have been reasonably aware that the Claimant was a disabled person?
e) From what date did the Respondent have knowledge of the Claimants disability? (constructive or actual)? The respondent accepts it had knowledge of the impairment from and was made aware on 17/5/24 but denies that the impairment amounts to a disability. Direct race / disability / sex discrimination

2. The Claimant relies on the following protected characteristics of race: black of black Caribbean ethnic origin, menopause symptoms, and a woman.

3. Did the Respondent subject the Claimant to the following alleged less favourable treatment?

a) On or around 7 May 2024 changing the Claimant’s duties from that of a workday analyst to that of a script tester.
b) Unilaterally “pausing” and suspending the Claimants probationary period on 23 February 2024.
c) Holding the probationary meeting on 29 May 2024 in circumstances where the claimant was unfit to attend it.
d) Failure to provide an occupational health assessment on or after 12 April 2024.
e) Failure to provide a risk assessment despite being made aware of the Claimant’s fragile mental health on 13 May 2024.

4. Does the Tribunal find that such treatment occurred?

5. If so, has the Claimant proven facts from which (absent any other explanation) an unlawful act of discrimination could be inferred? If not, the claim fails.

6. The Claimant says she was treated worse than hypothetical comparators and the following comparators in respect of race:

a. Ryan Cartwright
b. Jonathan Lomas
c. Anna Beck
d. Andrew Wilson

7. If so, has the Respondent demonstrated that the unfavourable treatment was not connected to the Claimant’s alleged race/disability

/sex

Failure to make reasonable adjustments

8. What is the PCP, physical feature or lack of auxiliary aid that the Claimant alleges put her at a substantial disadvantage compared to persons who are not disabled?

a. There is a practice to not provide a detailed written agenda prior to meetings or to follow the agenda in meetings.

9. What was the substantive disadvantage to which the Claimant was put compared to persons who are not disabled?

a. The Claimant states that she was unable to actively participate and be properly prepared for meetings.

10. Did the Respondent know, or ought reasonably to have known that the Claimant was likely to be placed at a substantial disadvantage because of their alleged disability in respect of the PCP?

a. The Claimant states that the Respondent was made aware on 17 May 2024.

11. Did the Respondent take such steps as were reasonable to avoid the disadvantage?

12. What reasonable adjustment does the Claimant say the Respondent should have made?

a. The Claimant states that she should have been provided with a written detailed agenda prior to any meeting.

13. Was the adjustment reasonable in the circumstances?

14. Would that reasonable adjustment in question have alleviated the substantial disadvantage?

Wrongful dismissal / Breach of contract

15. The terms of the contract relied upon are;

a) The implied term of trust and confidence.
b) The implied term of duty of care for an employee’s health and safety
c) The express entitlement to complete a six month probationary period as set out in the Claimant’s statement of main terms and conditions of employment.
d) The implied term that the Respondent would provide accurate information on tax documentation to the Claimant.

16. The Claimant relies on the following matters as individually cumulatively amounting to a breach of her contract;

a) Not affording the Claimant the full 6 month probationary period.
b) Failing to provide a mental health first aider at the formal meeting th on the 29 May 2024
c) Failing to make an occupational Health referral to check if the claimant was in a mental fit state to attend the formal meeting on 29 May 2024 Health and Safety
d) Suspending the Claimant’s probationary period and subsequently failing to restart it
e) Changing the Claimant’s duties from that of a workday analyst to that of a script tester
f) The Respondent’s failure to properly investigate the Claimants claims, i.e. by appointing the same person throughout, specifically;
i. Philip North was appointed as the grievance decision maker on 17 January 2024 and 22 May 2024,
ii. Philip North was the investigator of the claims on 22 February
iii. Philip North conducted a formal probationary review on 29 May 2024, and probationary meeting on 5 June 2024
iv. Philip North’s Line Manager Naomi S heard the Dismissal appeal which was not upheld this was bias just two senior managers involved in the dismissal from the same management line nd
v. Failure to consider the 2 grievance, on 22 May 2024 Philip North stated that it would be discussed at the formal probationary review meeting

17. Did these events occur? If so, did this amount to a breach of the contract?

18. Did the Claimant waive or affirm any of the alleged breaches of the implied terms relied upon?

19. Insofar as the Tribunal finds that there has been a dismissal, was this a wrongful dismissal?

Victimisation

20. Did the Claimant do a protected act as follows:

(a) Claimant’s grievance submitted 17 January 2024;
(b) Claimant’s grievance submitted 17 May 2024; and
(c) Bringing proceedings. The respondent accepts these are all protected acts

21. Did the Respondent do the following things:

a) Refuse the Claimant’s request for a reasonable split of work of Testrail on 7 May 2024.
b) Failure to give due consideration to the grievance appeal dated 22 May 2024 on 29 May 2024.
c) Failure to provide a fair probationary review on 29 May 2024.
d) Holding a probationary review which was in the nature of a disciplinary hearing.
e) Refusing the Claimant’s request to have only one manager undertake the monthly ABLE performance review.
f) From 17 April 2024 Derek Coombes stopping communicating with the Claimant, ignoring all emails so the Claimant could not carry out her work effectively to add the work to my probationary review. Working on TestTrail did not provide and prove her skillset in relation to the PIP and objectives set by her managers which disadvantaged her
g) Failing to comply with the contract in that the Respondent did not permit the Claimant to complete the probationary period where others were allowed to complete the period.
h) Failing to consider any alternative options i.e. extension of the probation period.
i) Claimant agreed to partake in mediation to resolve workplace issues the two managers rejected this suggestion
j) Failing to take into account the Claimants successful progress and vast workday experience in the work.
k) The Respondent insisted on holding the meeting dated 29 May 2024, without providing a detailed written agenda, or giving due consideration to whether the Claimant was fit to attend the meeting.
l) Dismissed the Claimant on the basis of an unsuccessful probation which was meant to last 6 months but was in place for 4 months.
m) The Claimant received her final payments over two payments, which were due June 2024 and only received in July 2024 and as such was taxed at a higher rate.
n) Failing to provide a response to the DSAR and subsequent data requests made on 26 February 2024, 21 March 2024, 27 March 2024, 17 October 2024, 22 November 2024.
o) Dismissal

22. By doing so, did the Respondent thereby subject the Claimant to a detriment?

a) The Claimant states that she was unable to complete her probation period and thus secure permanent employment.
b) The Claimant was unable to properly prepare and participate in the meeting on 29 May 2024, as the agenda was not reflective of the meeting and Philip North did not pause to provide adequate breaks, as he said he would do

23. If it did, did the Respondent subject the Claimant to the detriment because the Claimant had done one (or more) protected act?

Remedy

24. What financial losses has the discrimination / unlawful conduct caused the Claimant?

25. Has the Claimant taken reasonable steps to mitigate her loss?

26. If not, for what period of loss should the Claimant be compensated?

27. What injury to feelings has the discrimination / unlawful conduct caused the Claimant and how much compensation should be awarded for that?

28. Should interest be awarded? How much?

29. Did the ACAS Code of Practice on Disciplinary and Grievance Procedures apply?

30. Did the Respondent unreasonably fail to comply with it?

31. If so, is it just and equitable to increase or any award payable to the Claimant?

32. By what proportion, up to 25%?

33. Should any recommendation be made? The Facts The parties

14. The respondent is government department. Within that department this case is concerned with the Human Resources and Transformation Directorate. There were around 175 people in the directorate. Mrs Ramsay was the Director. Under her line management there were 16 Deputy Directors, including Mr North, Ms Sparkes and Ms Saide, who were each responsible for discrete and large areas of work. Mr North had line management responsibility for Mr Coombes, who in turn had line management responsibility for Ms Taylor and Ms Smith.

15. Beneath this was a small team of Higher Executive Officers (HEO) / Human Resources Information Technology (HRIS) Analysts, known as the development team.

16. Their role was to manage a software platform used by the respondent for HR functions called Workday.

17. The claimant is an information technology professional with previous experience of Workday.

The claimant’s recruitment

18. Before September 2023 the respondent advertised a position for a HEO / HRIS Analyst to join the development team.

19. At that point in time there were four members of the development team, none of whom were on probation. They were all white, with three male and one female.

20. The terms of the advert were as follows in terms of the job description (page 174):

“Key responsibilities of the role include:

• Partnering with key stakeholders to understand their business requirements and how the system can best support these.
• Being proactive in understanding system functionality and future roadmaps to ensure we are optimising our use of Workday.
• Supporting, analysing, troubleshooting, and resolving Workday issues
• Working closely with our Data and IT teams to develop and maintain integrations into downstream business solutions
• Delivering and supporting optimisation projects and enhancements
• Documenting technical specifications and mapping of impact across the business
• Escalation for complex queries relating to Workday business processes to ensure effective system service delivery. Working closely with the HR, Payroll and Expenses teams to ensure a seamless user experience
• Training and upskilling key stakeholders in the use of Workday
• Analysing system performance and suggest improvements.
• Manage the review, impact analysis and implementation of the bi- annual Workday release cycle
• Deliver Products, Tools, and Documentation, ensuring the delivery of change is made against a fully auditable process
• Maintaining the security for the system including; testing, assurance, data privacy and best practices.”

21. The essential criteria included: “Workday Pro or equivalent Workday training (6+ Workday certified courses to include HCM Fundamentals, Report Writer, Business Process Fundamentals plus one specialism i.e. Learning, Time Off, Performance)”

22. The claimant applied and in her application referred to 6 such courses (page 188): “I have completed Workday certified courses in HCM Fundamentals, Report Writer, Business Process Fundamentals Time Off and Time Tracking Compensation and Advanced Compensation…”

23. The claimant was successful in her application and commenced employment on 1 September 2023.

24. The terms of her contract provided as follows (p194 onwards):

“Introduction

Your Employment with the Department for Education (DfE) is in accordance with the employment conditions contained within this contract of employment and those which are found as part of the policies and procedures contained on the DfE’s Intranet site.

…

Probation

Your employment with DfE will require the completion of a successful probationary period. The department’s probationary period duration is six months, therefore you will be on probation until 1 March 2024. We will confirm your appointment provided you have shown that you can meet the normal requirements of your grade HEO and your attendance and conduct have been satisfactory. If you do not reach the required standard we will normally terminate your contract. In exceptional circumstances we may extend your period of probation. Your appointment may be terminated at any time during the probationary period if your service is unsatisfactory and it is clear that you will not be able to reach the required standard before the end of the probationary period.

…

Notice

… The Crown has the power to dismiss at will, and this contract is subject to that power. If your contract is terminated by DfE (other than for summary dismissal or redundancy) then you will receive the notice period set out below:

• Continuous Service for up to four years is five weeks
• Continuous Service for four years and over is one week plus one week for every year of continuous service up to a maximum of 13 weeks. You will receive no notice if your employment is terminated early by mutual consent. If for any reason the department prefers you not to remain at work during any notice period, you may be given payment in lieu of notice.”

25. One of the policies we have been referred to during the hearing is the Probation Policy. The version which was disclosed and provided in the bundle notes as footnote ‘Last updated Apr’16’. The claimant quite rightly noted in these proceedings that disclosed document did not match the excerpts provided in correspondence to her, and raised this in cross examination with Mr North. As discussed above, a further document was then produced and further cross examination was permitted. We accept Mr North’s explanation that the excerpts in correspondence were taken from the respondent’s intranet and cut and pasted. We also accept the new version is the correct version which applied to the claimant’s employment at the time. Although we appreciate the claimant’s valid concern that the incorrect document was disclosed despite her specifically asking for this document, we do not consider the fact that the wrong version disclosed impacts on Mr North’s credibility as a witness as he personally was not responsible for the disclosure exercise. He was able to provide information in evidence as to where the correct document was to be found and it was then swiftly located.

26. We therefore only refer to the updated version which was provided during the course of the hearing. This provides for a six month probation period for all new employees to the department. The policy requires line managers to undertake two formal probation reviews at three and six months. In relation to informal reviews, the policy provides (page 1007): “Regular informal reviews help line managers to provide employees with support throughout probation and to identify and address any concerns or minor misconduct early in the process. The performance management process (ABLE) applies to employees on probation. As such, line managers should also use monthly check-ins as informal probation reviews during the probation period. The probation checklist (Word, 8 pages) shows the issues that should be covered at informal reviews. Line managers must retain brief notes of monthly informal probation reviews for their records. All notes must be shared with the employee in line with record keeping guidance. However, line managers do not need to wait until the monthly check-in to have an informal discussion with the employee - they can take place whenever immediate or early intervention is needed. Line managers must retain brief notes of any such discussions for their records.

In such cases, line managers must discuss with the employee:

• the area(s) of concern
• the standard expected
• timescale for improvement (usually no more than one month)
• additional support / guidance to be provided
• how this will continue to be monitored and reviewed If the problem persists or is more serious (e.g., gross misconduct), formal action may be more appropriate. Line managers should contact the CSHR Casework Service for advice.”

27. There is then a section entitled ‘Outside formal reviews’ which states (page 1008): “If a serious issue (including gross misconduct) arises in relation to the employee’s conduct, attendance and / or performance that cannot be dealt with informally, line managers can arrange a formal meeting at any time during probation. ….”

28. In respect of formal meetings, the policy provides (page 1010): “The decision maker will, where possible, be senior to the line manager and have authority to consider the appropriate level of sanction. The decision maker must be at Deputy Director level (or at least one grade above the employee concerned if the employee is DD level or above) where the outcome of the formal meeting is likely to be dismissal.”

29. Under the heading ‘Dismissal – unsuccessful probation’ it is provided (page 1013): “Dismissal can only be considered if the employee has already been issued with a written warning during the probation process and their attendance / conduct / work performance has not improved in the timescale specified unless gross misconduct applies. A formal meeting must be held prior to any decision to dismiss. Dismissals can only be made by a Deputy Director (DD, or at least one grade above the employee concerned if the employee is DD level or above), who should seek advice from the CSHR Casework Service. The employee must have been made aware in the letter about the formal meeting and at the actual meeting that the outcome could result in action

up to and including dismissal.”

30. Under the heading ‘Suspending probation’ the policy provides that if line managers are unable to assess an employee’s suitability for the role due to a lengthy period of absence during the probation period, they may suspend the probation period temporarily. It notes that probation should normally be suspended where employees are temporarily unable to work in their substantive role. It also notes that probation may be suspended temporarily to deal with a dispute and resume once a dispute has been addressed. The policy provides that when the employee returns to work, managers must arrange an informal discussion to resume the probation period and process.

31. Separately, the respondent has a ‘Managing under performance policy’. The overview provides (page 887): “This policy applies to all grades who are underperforming or are at risk of underperforming and have completed probation. For those who have not completed probation, view the probation policy. Underperformance is a capability issue and can be identified through poor quality of work, failure to meet deadlines or targets, low volume of work achieved and negative actions and behaviours that impact on others. Issues outside of this are likely conduct issues and should be dealt with

under the disciplinary policy.”

32. Under the heading ‘Managing underperformance informally’ the policy provides: “In most cases, dealing with dips in performance should be dealt with through monthly check-ins and additional 121s. Line managers should discuss their expectations and causes of underperformance in their check-ins. They should provide targeted support, constructive feedback, and development opportunities to help employees achieve and maintain good performance standards within an agreed timeframe. To do this, a performance improvement plan may be discussed with the employee and implemented. Performance, including any improvement plans, should be monitored, and regularly reviewed. If underperformance is linked to ill health, disability, or gender reassignment, you should contact the Occupational Health Service and consider any reasonable adjustments.”

The claimant’s employment

33. The claimant joined the team under the line management of Ms Smith, although Ms Taylor was also involved in managing the claimant during the first three months, and formally took over line management on 21 December 2023.

34. On 7 September 2023 Ms Taylor sent a message to the claimant (page 191): “…I’m just sorting your learning/named support contact account on Workday Customer Centre. Please could you let me have your previous email address that you were registered with and then they will link your account so that your learning history feeds through…”

35. The claimant provided her previous email address.

36. Pre-employment checks for the claimant were satisfactorily completed on 8 September 2023. We accept Ms Smith’s evidence that these were identity checks. They did not include checks in relation to Workday certifications. A Workday transcripts showing what courses had been attended could only be requested after the commencement of employment.

37. On 13 September 2023 Ms Taylor emailed the claimant in relation to her training record, after the claimant confirmed she had no training with her previous employer (page 203): “Ahhh OK. I might be able to get any previous training transferred if you want, but entirely up to you [smiley emoji]”

38. The claimant replied the next day that she would leave it for now.

39. Part of the assessment of probationers was a ‘Talent Matrix Placement’ which was used to grade probationers at the end of monthly Able one-to- one meetings. On 11 October 2023 Ms Smith rated the claimant ‘Inconsistent’ on this document.

40. Related to this is an email dated 7 June 2023 before the claimant started her employment, from the Head of HR Operations and Transformation Ms Milikouris to various individuals, including Ms Smith (page 190):

“Here’s my notes with actions from our discussion:

1. Action for all re new starter placement – please discuss with your managers – we had a conversation about the landing position on the Talent Grid for new starters and concluded that, going forward, we will generally (depending on – for example – whether they are new to grade) expect to see them in ‘Inconsistent’ initially before (quickly providing no performance issues) moving to another box on the grid. This is instead of using ‘Early Promise’ as the default (although this may be the right box for

new starters by exception).”

41. The claimant accepted in cross examination her score would be ‘Inconsistent’ in accordance with that email, but suggested that positive feedback could also have been added. Ms Smith explained in her cross examination that probationers have monthly Able conversations, which influenced but were not directly linked to the Talent Matrix Placement ratings. The documentation for this did not include a free text box, only drop-down options. There was however a separate feedback tool where people could share feedback about an employee or colleague by reference to specific skills, however this was not a function widely used across the department. We accept Ms Smith’s evidence on this point. It is consistent with the type of positive feedback which we have seen screenshotted and included later in the claimant’s Performance Improvement Plan.

42. We note that the following further ratings were given during this period (page 866):

3 November 2023 – Effective (rated by Ms Smith)

18 December 2023 – Inconsistent (rated by Ms Smith) 21 December 2023 – Inconsistent (rated by Ms Taylor)

43. The claimant alleges that at around the end of November 2023 Ms Taylor offered ‘ownership of modules’ work to the claimant’s colleague Ms Beck, who refused it, and did not offer the work to the claimant. The claimant stated in cross examination that when she asked whether she could do this work she was told perhaps, but they (we infer Ms Smith and Ms Taylor) wanted to see she had the fundamental learning course on Workday, which she accepts she did not have. Ms Smith states in her witness statement that Ms Beck had previously been responsible for the module and had completed the relevant training, therefore had the skill set needed to undertake the work required. The Tribunal accepts both accounts, which are not inconsistent.

44. On 29 November 2023 Ms Smith and Ms Taylor together held the claimant’s three month probation review meeting. The record of the meeting notes a summary of things that had gone well, and two areas for improvement, namely project management and stakeholder management. The claimant was at this point on track to complete the probation period successfully. The record states that the following actions were agreed: “-Take ownership of the Job Profiles project to enable us to see your full capability. -Provide clear and timely updates through Jira. -Project Manage to ensure key deliverables remain track for deadlines.”

45. The claimant states that during this meeting she was asked to transfer her core learning from Workday to the respondent. Ms Smith states that she raised the requirement for the Claimant to provide confirmation of her training history as part of her review. In addition, she reiterated that she had refused access to the system to other people who had not completed the required training and as such it was very important that the claimant provide her training confirmation. We prefer Ms Smith’s account of what was said about training. It is clear from the respondent’s consistent evidence throughout the hearing that it was important for the claimant’s training record to be verified by the respondent and thus evidenced by the claimant. The claimant did not have good recall of this meeting in cross examination. We also find that there was a full discussion about the areas for improvement, which related to the claimant taking on the Job Profiles project. We are supported in this by the emails written later to the claimant by Ms Smith on 18 December 2023 at 14.44pm and 19 December 2023 at 14.33pm, set out below.

46. We note that the formal record was not in fact shared with the claimant until around 18 December 2023, as discussed below.

47. It was around this point the claimant transferred part of her Workday transcript which showed four (but not all) of her completed courses.

48. On 1 December 2023 Ms Taylor emailed the claimant with priorities for the following week, stating that objectives would be put on Workday when she returned from leave. This included a piece of work on a Job Profiles project. Ms Taylor set out a number of points for the claimant to complete in December, and referred to ‘Jiras’ which were tasks set out in more detail on the respondent’s online system, giving the claimant a clear deadline for three of the tasks to be completed and noting that they would meet to go through together on Ms Taylor’s return. The email mentions ‘BAU’, referring to ‘Business as usual’, which for this team included regular UDS checks, which the claimant was at this point not trained to do. The email stated it would be good to get the claimant to a point where she could pick up this work, but that would be left to January (page 844).

49. On around 7 December 2023 Mr Coombes relayed to Ms Smith that he had seen the claimant in the office and she had been feeling unwell. Mr Coombes sent Ms Smith a message with a draft email to send to the claimant confirming that she could work at home under the hybrid policy and asked her to get in touch with Ms Smith to discuss (page 231). An email with the same text was sent to the claimant by Mr Coombes on the same day (page 466).

50. We accept Mr North’s uncontested evidence that it was brought to his attention on the morning of 7 December 2023 that the claimant was complaining about having to attend the office while unwell. At that time all employees had been asked to attend the office 60% of the time, and Mr North considered the claimant did not appreciate that this expectation could be adjusted if an employee felt unwell but was able to work from home. It was him who contacted Mr Coombes and asked him to contact the claimant to inform her that if she was unwell she did not need to attend the office. We further accept Ms Smith’s evidence that Mr Coombes relayed to her verbally in a weekly Teams meeting, of which there is no written record, that the claimant hadn’t been feeling very well in the office. The reason for this was that Ms Smith was not based at the same location. Mr Coombes clarified in cross examination that the reason for the draft email was that he was the countersigning officer, the line manager’s manager, and hadn’t been working closely with the claimant at this time. He wanted to make sure the message to the claimant landed well as hybrid working had been the source of some tension in the organisation. The intention was for the message to be supportive.

51. On 11 December 2023 Ms Smith sent messages to the claimant between 8.40am and 10.02am asking if the claimant was feeling better, to which the claimant responded that she was ok but did not want to spread it, and saying that the claimant should have said the previous week that she was not well (page 489).

52. On 15 December 2023 there was a series of emails between the claimant and Ms Taylor about the claimant’s courses. At 16.01pm Ms Taylor

emailed (page 849):

“I just wanted to touch base on your training record. I saw the notifications (as NSC) that Workday have linked some of your previous records (Arriva and Nuffield Health I think). This has pulled through your HCM Fundamentals, Business Process Fundamentals, Report Writer and Configurable Security Fundamentals. Please could you arrange for your record to be linked that evidences your Time Off Fundamentals, Time Tracking Fundamentals, Compensation Fundamentals and Advanced Compensation Fundamentals. Sorry this is proving to be difficult in terms of getting your records linked, but given these are essential requirements of the role we have to verify the certifications. I will hopefully be around more next week and we can catch up then. But just wanted to flag this in the meantime so that you can be liaising with Workday to get the remaining certifications confirmed.”

53. The claimant replied at 17.10pm: “Can you let me know where it is required that I have done all the courses listed? Is this a requirement for all the team? I thought the key courses were HCM Fundamentals, Business Process Fundamentals, Report Writer and Configurable Security Fundamentals, which I have referenced in my workday learning record. I have declared the courses relevant for the role please let me know if this is not the case.”

54. Ms Smith responded at 17.12pm (page 850): “I’ve attached the job advert which outlines the essential criteria for the role of Workday Pro or equivalent Workday training (6+ Workday certified courses to include HCM Fundamentals, Report Writer, Business Process Fundamentals plus one specialism i.e. Learning, Time Off, Performance) I’d asked for the specific courses below as they are the ones you’d stated in your application which made up the 6+ certifications including the specialism (in your case around Compensation, Time Tracking and Time

Off)

We’ve got some time in on Wednesday so we can pick up then.”

55. At 17.47pm the claimant emailed Ms Taylor asking for a copy of her three month probation review record from 29 November 2023. Ms Taylor replied that she and Ms Smith were looking at how best to transition line management between them and copied in Ms Smith to send a copy of the report.

56. On 17 December 2023 Ms Taylor emailed the claimant to provide her clarity on ongoing priorities in order for the claimant to build out her objectives over the next couple of months, and extending deadlines for some work as they had not had a meeting the previous week. She requested the claimant to send her the initial slide decks she had drafted that were detailed in the Jiras the following morning so that Ms Taylor could prioritise looking at these and provide feedback for the claimant to refine them for the remainder of the week.

57. On 18 December 2023 Ms Taylor invited the claimant to attend a meeting about her Workday certifications, which the claimant requested to have recorded. At 11.31am she emailed to confirm the conversation (page 855): “To confirm our conversation earlier, the information we require is your training record which confirms you have carries out the courses below in full and as such have ‘passed’ the course. Basically exactly the same as attached for the HCM, Report Writer, Configurable Security and Business Process courses. You’ll see some will show as ‘passed’ and others as ‘do not track’. I’m not worried about that element (it is dependant upon the trainer as to how they complete). I just need to be able to see that you have fully attended each of the course and they are successfully completed. Please could you now link in with Workday to get your remaining course history that evidence the courses below, which you have confirmed you’ve attended linked to your learning record so that we have this evidence. Ideally if you could get this in advance of our check in on Wednesday please that would be great.”

58. Ms Taylor sent a further email at 11.48am (page 856): “As we explained during the meeting and stated in the email below, the essential requirements for the role are: Workday Pro or equivalent Workday training (6+ Workday certified courses to include HCM Fundamentals, Report Writer, Business Process Fundamentals plus one specialism i.e. Learning, Time Off, Performance) The outstanding courses that we require confirmation of are those outlined on your application. These are stated below but for ease they are:

• Time Off Fundamentals
• Time Tracking Fundamentals
• Compensation Fundamentals
• Advanced Compensation Fundamentals. If you can get Workday to evidence your full attendance on these courses then that will provide what we need.”

59. At 12.08pm the claimant emailed Ms Taylor and Ms Smith asking again for her probation review report. Ms Smith sent this by return email at 12.45pm with her apologies for the delay. We accept her evidence that she had simply forgotten to send it.

60. At 12.49pm Ms Taylor emailed the claimant stating she had been reflecting on the meeting and that it was not normal practice to record meetings and would ask that the claimant did not record meetings going forward.

61. At 13.21pm the claimant emailed Ms Smith and Ms Taylor about the probation review report (page 860): “Thank you both for my 3-month Probation outcome. Unfortunately, the below was not discussed as dependencies against my successful probation completion and therefore this review is not accurate as to what was discussed. The 3 denoted in red were not even discussed at all and are ambiguous and a complete surprise to me.

• Take ownership of the Job Profiles project to enable us to see your full capability.
• Provide clear and timely updates through Jira.
• Project Manage to ensure key deliverables remain track for deadlines.
• Project Management [marked in red]
• Stake Holder Management [marked in red] Please can you evidence the bullets in red as to where we discussed or referenced this and how and what they can be measured against for my success. As I don't even have a starting point as we never discussed them.”

62. There followed a series of emails between them all debating what had been discussed, and the claimant requested a meeting to discuss the objectives set and seeking SMART clarity.

63. This included an email from Ms Smith at 14.44pm in response to the claimant’s email at 13.21pm (page 283): “The below is in relation to the conversation we had regarding the new Job Profiles project. We discussed that by taking ownership of this project it would give you a better opportunity to take forward Key deliverables and deadlines within the project requirements and give an opportunity to create good relationships with Key Stakeholders within the project.”

64. The exchange culminated in Ms Taylor sending a lengthy email at 16.23pm (page 863). “Sure, we will pick up in your monthly 1-1 on Wednesday. In the meantime, I would refer you to the Jira’s in terms of the Specific, Measurable, Achievable and Realistic elements of SMART and the email below (the yellow highlighted part) where I’d outlined the deadline for getting the draft slide decks prepared in terms of the Timed element. I’d asked you to link in with Rachel in my absence so that I’d got a draft to review when I returned from leave. Have you got anything that I can be looking at in advance of our meeting on Wednesday as that will enable us to make best use of our time when we catch up? I have copied the detail of the objectives below – all except the first BAU one are a direct copy of the information which I’d put into Jira. I’d purposely invested time prior to my annual leave working up much more detailed Jira’s than I’d normally draft to ensure you had the clarity needed to make progress against this in my absence. The deadlines for each strand are on each Jira. I’d revised the due date of Objective 2, 3 and 4 from the initial date of 15 December to the 22 December to recognise that I unfortunately had to cancel the meeting last week given personal circumstances. I do though really need to have sight of the draft slide decks in order to best support you in meeting the deadline of Friday so could please send those onto me/provide a link (even in draft form). As there are no updates on the Jira’s I’m currently unable to see where you are at with each of the tasks below, what insights you have found from communities etc which would enable me to support you more remotely.”

65. She then copied and pasted the objectives from Workday.

66. On 19 December 2023 at 9.37am the claimant sent an email to Ms Taylor (page 269): “I have a lot to offer this team, and I think together we can make a positive difference for the business, but I respectfully ask for some consideration, as I do not feel supported, or that I have been set up for success. I hope we can find a way forward.”

67. Ms Taylor responded that this would be covered in the one to one meeting, and that she would reply to the claimant’s other emails in advance of the meeting to discuss then (page 269).

68. At 9.55am the claimant emailed Ms Taylor expressing an interest in further Workday training and responding to Ms Taylor’s email of 15 December 2023 in relation to Workday certifications, (page 287): “I was quite surprised to receive the below rather than any word on the above, and that my previous workday learning courses was brought into question, as Rachel stated the core workday courses have to have been done, Which I have evidenced. I have been given Talent as part of my objectives, and as you know I have not undertaken this workday course, so one might have thought I would have been offered the course as part of setting me up for success, as I understand my colleague recently undertook a workday course to support his work assignments. I really hope I can be considered and afforded the same opportunities at some point.”

69. Ms Taylor responded at 13.38pm that there had not been training credits available since May 2023, and those had been assigned to colleagues in post at the time. She continued (page 287): “ The immediate focus is for you to provide your Workday learning record to demonstrate you have undertaken the courses outlined on your application form. For clarity these are:

• Time Off Fundamentals
• Time Tracking Fundamentals
• Compensation Fundamentals
• Advanced Compensation Fundamentals. You confirmed yesterday that you have undertaken these and that you would link in with Workday to update your training history. Please could you prioritise doing that ahead of our monthly 1-1 tomorrow.”

70. Ms Smith then emailed at 14.33pm in relation to the claimant’s objectives (page 281): “ The objectives that you have in place through the Job Profiles project links in with the three areas you have highlighted below and so no further objectives are required to meet this. The two main areas for improvement are Project Management and Key Stakeholder Management. You should be able to demonstrate these through delivering against the actions of Take ownership of the Job Profiles project to enable us to see your full capability, Provide clear and timely updates through Jira and Project manage to ensure that key deliverable remain on track for deadlines. Key Stakeholder management although not stated as a separate action falls within the scope of the project delivery. Happy to discuss these further if you need to in our meeting tomorrow.”

71. The one to one meeting with Ms Smith and Ms Taylor was due to go ahead on 20 December 2023. The meeting started at 15.00pm however at 15.01pm the claimant messaged in the chat as follows (page 290): “I find having two Line managers conduct my monthly check-in rather intimidating, and I would respectfully ask that only one conduct my 1-1…”

72. In response Ms Taylor cancelled the meeting. She emailed the claimant at 18.13pm explaining that the reason for them both attending was that Ms Smith was still the claimant’s line manager but that Ms Taylor had been task managing the majority of the work the claimant had been doing. They both attended one to ones for other staff in the same way. She went on (page 291): “It concerns us both that you feel our joint attendance at your monthly check in is intimidating for you. You need to have your monthly check-in in order for us to appropriately support you through your performance and development and, as you are still in it, your probation period too. As such to enable you to feel comfortable in attending your monthly check- in, I will reschedule it for tomorrow. I will assume formal line management responsibility for you and attend your check in on my own, as your line manager, so that we can prioritise supporting you. This is done in your full knowledge that if I am unable to continue to act as your line manager, for the reasons I have shared, that this may swap back to Rachel and so on. I will pick this up with you tomorrow in terms of why you feel it is intimidating so we can understand that and hopefully move towards the approach that we feel will best support you going forward. I will also cover at the start, for any avoidance of doubt, what the purpose and scope of the monthly check-ins is.”

73. The meeting therefore took place the following day with just the claimant and Ms Taylor. Ms Taylor confirmed what was discussed in the meeting in a very lengthy email the following day, copying in Mr Coombes (page 300). In brief summary, this included a discussion about the events of that week, including the number of requests made by Ms Smith and Ms Taylor in previous one to one meetings about access to the claimant’s Workday learning course history in order to confirm her attendance on the courses outlined in her application form, and that the claimant’s experience and training history had formed part of the rationale for making a pay case for a higher rate of pay for the claimant. Ms Taylor had explained that she had found the claimant’s behaviour very challenging and, in some cases, confrontational, and maintained that it was a reasonable management request and required the claimant to link with Workday to provide confirmation of her attendance on the courses before the next one to one on 2 January.

74. Ms Taylor explained that the Payroll security work the claimant had been leading on had been handed over to a colleague at the same grade to free up the claimant’s capacity to focus on job profile work.

75. There was then a discussion about the request made by Ms Taylor to provide slide decks and that the claimant’s evasive behaviour in terms of not providing the slide deck or update in itself had detrimentally impacted on the claimant’s performance.

76. Ms Taylor confirmed that due to the behaviours she had observed in the past fortnight and the impact these were having on the claimant’s performance, measures would be put in place to support underperformance informally for the next month, and a Performance Improvement Plan would therefore be put in place.

77. Ms Taylor expressed her concern that the claimant did not feel supported and offered mediation with herself and Ms Smith to rebuild the relationship. The claimant was signposted to the Fair Treatment Ambassadors and the Employee Assistance Programme.

78. The claimant does not dispute in her witness evidence that this was an accurate summary of what was discussed. She describes this document in her witness statement as a detailed email to confirm all that Ms Taylor expected of her.

79. A detailed Performance Improvement Plan dated 21 December 2023 was then drafted and sent to the claimant. The areas for improvement were communicating and influencing (in relation to the heated email exchanges); not responding to reasonable management request in a timely manner (in relation to Workday training attendance and the slide decks); managing the governance and ways of working within the team to ensure appropriate workflow and planning; independent working/making progress against deadlines; and stakeholder management. In relation to stakeholder management, it was noted that colleagues in payroll had fed back that they would have liked to see more clarity on how the work was due to progress and what they were looking to achieve, and that the process had felt more disjointed than they were used to. This work had been handed over to a colleague.

80. On 21 December 2023 the claimant received good stakeholder feedback from a colleague. This was later added to the PIP under the stakeholder management section.

81. The next one to one meeting between the claimant and Ms Taylor was held on 2 January 2024. In an email at 13.03pm Ms Taylor referred to the request she had made for the claimant to confirm her attendance on Workday courses as discussed in the meeting, and the claimant’s request to speak to a Fair Treatment Ambassador. Ms Taylor confirmed that she had intended to make a final request at the meeting before she considered the claimant’s refusal a conduct issue, however given the claimant’s request she set a new deadline to make the request to Workday by 10 January 2024.

82. The claimant has not disputed that this discussion took place. She forwarded the email to the Fair Treatment Ambassador, Ms Gray, and had a meeting with her later that day.

83. A further meeting was held between the claimant and Ms Taylor on 9 January 2024. After the meeting the claimant emailed Ms Taylor seeking an occupational health referral and stating that she was feeling overwhelmed and quite stressed about her current work situation (page 329).

84. Ms Taylor responded she would arrange this and that they should also carry out a stress risk assessment. The claimant requested that the assessment should be done by another manager, and this was arranged to be completed by Mr Coombes on 10 January 2024.

85. Ms Taylor responded again at 10.28pm detailing the discussions they had at the meeting and reiterating the deadline of 10 January 2024 to contact Workday. Ms Taylor confirmed she would arrange the occupational health referral and again referred the claimant to the Employee Assistance Programme. She noted that the claimant had said she would not find mediation helpful, and that they had discussed the dispute resolution process. There had not been a chance for a full discussion in relation to progress on the PIP, and Ms Taylor proposed that now the claimant had commented on it they could track progress and priorities.

86. On 10 January 2024 the claimant reported sick. On 11 January 2024 Ms Taylor acknowledged her absence (page 342). She asked if the stress risk assessment could be conducted while the claimant was absent, and confirmed the claimant’s occupational health appointment. The claimant responded that she did not wish for Mr Coombes to carry out the appointment unless this was compulsory.

87. On 11 January 2024, the deadline for contacting Workday having passed, Ms Taylor prepared a document entitled, ‘Formal Probationary Meeting: Management Report’, asking for an investigation into the claimant’s conduct following her failure to provide evidence of her full Workday training history. The decision maker was asked to consider a number of points, including whether this was a breach of the Civil Service Code and values, specifically around honesty and integrity, whether this had resulted in a breakdown of trust and confidence between employee and employer, and whether based on this the decision maker felt there was a case of Gross Misconduct.

88. On 17 January 2024 the claimant had a telephone consultation with occupational health and a report was produced. The report included the

following as to her condition:

“ Francesca indicated a recent build of stress symptoms which she attributes to perceived work-related stress. Francesca states that she has no previous difficulties with her mental health or work-related stress prior to this current incident. … Francesca reports that following an incident where she describes as a clash of personalities, she perceives that her current working environment has deteriorated. She has been commenced on a performance improvement plan (PIP) and so far, has attended two meetings. Francesca felt as though her perceived work-related stress was escalating, therefore she sought advice from her GP and has been currently signed off work. Francesca describes having disturbed sleep, often waking through the night thinking about work. She would feel fatigued during the day and was finding she required a nap in the day and her appetite was reduced. Francesca feels as though these symptoms have started to improve following her period of sickness absence. … General information and recommendations Francesca has described stress associated with the perceived issues at work and there is no evidence of any medical reason why she should not have medical capability for work. … It is unlikely Francesca’s condition will meet the requirements of the Equality Act 2010, as it is not a longstanding condition nor have significant impact on her daily activities. This however remains a legal rather than a medical decision.”

89. On the same day, the claimant raised a formal grievance against Ms Taylor and Ms Smith, alleging discrimination in relation to her age and race (page 347). The grievance covers a number of issues, some of which are now raised in the claim.

90. The grievance was forwarded to Mr North, who appointed Ms Zara Ahmed as an independent investigator. The claimant’s line management was transferred to Mr Coombes.

91. The claimant provided a GP note on 25 January 2024 citing ‘Stress- related problem’ and on 1 February 2024 again citing ‘Stress-related problem’ and at that point recommending a phased return to work.

92. Ms Ahmed held a grievance interview with the claimant on 1 February 2024.

93. On 2 February 2024 the claimant met with Mr Coombes to discuss arrangements for her return to work. Mr Coombes emailed at 13.03pm to confirm the content of the discussion (page 411). The claimant was allocated work on ‘ZD tickets’ meaning Workday related Zendesk tickets, where staff had raised queries to be responded to. Ms Taylor was to allocate some Jiras to the claimant to give her some ‘quick wins’. A further meeting was arranged in case she had any queries.

94. On 8 February 2024 Mr Coombes emailed the claimant about the work she should be doing during his leave to 21 February. By this point she was still working on supporting Zen Desk tickets and was also working on building out Testrail scripts for testing business processes when they changed or through future releases. The claimant was told who to contact if there were any issues or if she needed more work.

95. On the same day the claimant emailed Ms Taylor and Mr Coombes asking if she should attend a meeting the following day at 1pm relating to Workday Product Release. She offered to move the hours she was working on her phased return so she could attend (page 414).

96. Mr Coombes replied: “No you don’t need to attend this, it’s related to release testing which you don’t need to work on during your phased return.”

97. On 13 February 2024 Ms Taylor sent an email to Mr Coombes relaying some issues with the Zen Desk work the claimant had been doing.

98. On 14 February 2024 the claimant provided a fit note from her GP to extend her phased return.

99. On 15 February 2024 Ms Taylor emailed Mr Coombes and Mr North about an HEO team meeting which had taken place that day and what she described as challenging behaviours by the claimant. She indicated she was flagging this for later, potentially to be picked up once the grievance was resolved.

100. On 22 February 2024 the claimant emailed Ms Ahmed and Mr North alleging that since her return to work she had been victimised, and requested further matters against Ms Taylor and Ms Smith, and also matters against Mr Coombes, to be investigated as part of her grievance (page 458).

101. Mr North responded asking if the claimant had spoken to Mr Coombes and tried to resolve the matters informally.

102. The claimant replied that she had not, and repeated her request for the matters to be investigated or for a formal meeting to discuss.

103. Mr North replied again encouraging the claimant to speak to Mr Coombes to deal with the matter informally and explaining why this was appropriate.

104. The claimant’s further response was that she had been placed under a huge amount of work related stress, and had been totally unsupported. She requested independent support outside of her management chain if she was to talk with Mr Coombes informally (page 456).

105. The claimant then went on leave until 23 February 2024.

106. On 23 February 2024 the claimant met with Mr Coombes at 9am. At 9.46am the claimant emailed Mr North about the meeting (page 455): “I am back in the office today. I met with Derek for a catch up, at 9am and he said that you had informed him of the below, Derek also stated that he had not been passed the details or content and asked if I was able to share the contents of the victimisation claim with him as my LM. I explained that unfortunately I do not feel any trust between us and gave Derek the example of him writing everything down during our catch ups without telling me. He agreed and admits that yes, he is taking notes, and he will share them at the end of the call this is a typical example of Derek's behaviour towards me. Derek then went on to talk about our team away day and the set up for the day via teams, Derek then said " on the day I will get to me the three new members that he also hasn't met" - Not meeting the new team is my email to you regarding the victimisation that Derek stated he has not yet seen. This points towards an unfair process been levelled against me, and I am

requesting that this is taken into account going forward.”

107. Mr North responded at 12.36pm: “I mentioned to Derek yesterday that you had some issues with the way he was supporting you and that I hoped you would talk to him about them and try and resolve them. There was certainly no mention of your victimisation case in that conversation, though he is of course aware of it and is trying to support you, Nina and Rachel through it. I would like to understand better why you don’t trust him – I am not sure someone writing a note of a conversation is an example of that – sharing a note of a meeting is in both parties’ best interest and helps make sure there is no misunderstanding. In terms of not meeting the team, I don’t understand the reference to unfair process unless you are suggesting I have shared the details of your email with him – which I haven’t – and he has then chosen to address it in your conversation? It seems to me to be perfectly logical, given he was off last week, for him to be explaining to you when you will both meet the new team members (which addresses your concern that you weren’t being introduced). Should we meet and have a chat next week – probably best to talk it through in case I am misunderstanding you.”

108. At 13.12pm the claimant replied, reiterating her request to have a manager other than Mr Coombes investigate her complaint of victimisation and stating that the reference to ‘trust’ in Mr North’s email was ‘irrelevant and misleading to this request’.

109. Mr North responded at 15.43pm, referring to a meeting they were due to have, and stating that he had referred to trust because the claimant had raised her lack of trust in Mr Coombes.

110. A little earlier at 13.47pm Mr Coombes emailed the claimant with a note of their meeting, copying in Mr North (page 450). He notes in this email he had asked the claimant whether she felt able to share the concerns she had raised with Mr North, which she did not as she had no trust in her line management chain, including him. They had a discussion about the sick pay policy. Under the heading ‘Suspending your probation period’ Mr Coombes wrote as follows: “ I spoke about your probation period and that I had requested that it had been suspended and that Phil had approved this. I communicated the reason which is that I could not fairly assess your probation period since your absence had started on the 10 January and in case any of the concerns you had raised in your formal grievance related to the period of informal under performance that your previous line manager had placed you in. I confirmed that I would send you a letter confirming this and that we’d review when it was appropriate to resume your probation period (i.e. un-suspend it) following the outcome of your grievance.”

111. He sent her a link to the probation policy that he had made the decision under, and attached a formal letter. There was then discussion about attending a Team Awayday and a new area of work for her.

112. The formal letter of 23 February 2024 states: “I am writing to confirm the suspension of your probation period from the commencement of your sick absence on the 10 January. The probation period will resume when you have fully returned to work and once the grievance you have raised has been decided by the decision manager (Phil North). The total duration of the probation period in working time will remain as six months but will now be completed over a longer period.”

113. On the same day the claimant contacted ACAS to commence the early conciliation process.

114. On 26 February 2024 at 9.20am the claimant emailed Mr Coombes and Mr North, stating that the email sent to her on 7 December 2023 by Mr Coombes was the reason why she had no trust and confidence in Mr Coombes with regards to him being impartial in matters concerning her. She had asked Ms Ahmed to add this to her grievance (page 466).

115. At 10.56am the claimant emailed Mr North asking him for the process to raise the victimisation she alleged to have suffered. Mr North sent her the guidance on raising a complaint in response. They shared further emails as to what was required by the process, and Mr North indicated they could discuss the complaint at their meeting the next day 27 February 2024.

116. On 28 February 2024 the claimant emailed Mr Coombes stating that the information in the suspension of probation letter was ambiguous, and she would like to know the dates of stop and restart of her probation end date so she had something to work towards. She quoted from the probation policy about the requirement for a meeting once the probation period resumed.

117. On 29 February 2024 the claimant emailed Mr North raising a formal complaint about the email sent by Mr Coombes on 7 December 2023, asserting that this was a potential data breach in that Mr Coombes had shared information about her health, and seeking an investigation.

118. On 6 March 2024 the claimant emailed Mr Coombes, copying in Mr North, attaching a workplace adjustment passport in relation to the menopause and seeking accommodation of her additional requirements going forwards (page 495). Under details of disability the claimant states:

“496 yellow

119. In relation to workplace adjustments she stated she may need regular and frequent comfort and posture breaks during meetings. In

relation to communication, she stated:

“As I sometimes have brain fog, I find it useful for discussions to be both verbal and confirmed in writing, action points to be noted and for meeting invites and agendas to be issued to my electronic calendar. A wrap up discussion with colleagues following key meetings to ensure I have picked up all the relevant details and actions would be beneficial. I would appreciate sensitivity and understanding from management and colleagues.”

120. Under ‘Additional information’ she states: “I would also like it if we had an agenda item for all 1-1 meetings so I can prepare and keep on track this is to include my 1-1 ABLE Check-ins.”

121. Mr Coombes held a meeting with her the same day and later emailed her attaching an updated passport with adjustments agreed (page 505). The updated passport has a series of adjustments agreed, including: “Line manager (Derek) and Task manager (Nina) will look to put context and/or any agenda points in the meeting invites and in time for you to review/suggest anything else you'd like to cover to support preparation for meetings. Line manager (Derek) and Task manager (Nina) to send key points/summary of manager & task meetings. Francesca to then decide if any further wrap up discussion is needed.”

122. On 7 March the claimant emailed Mr Coombes and Ms Taylor about the project she was working on. Ms Taylor had a call with the claimant to discuss, and sent an email dated 8 March 2024 at 9.04am summarising the call. At two points in this email Ms Taylor gave her view that the claimant had expressed her frustration during the call.

123. In response, the claimant wrote at 9.25am: “I rebut your term below "frustration" and see this as yet a further attack on my character. I needed to stop the call, urgently and you saw that as me interrupting you. Both you and Derek have been instrumental in planning my failure at this project and have been decisive and unsupportive, your late additions to the Project plan evidence of this. @COOMBES, Derek I have asked you how this piece of work is to be graded / measured / credited to me and you are yet to respond, but i'm sure you will be able to record any negative aspect of this piece of work that you seem fit,I am been victimisation yet again.”

124. On 8 March 2024 Mr North prepared a note summarising the discussions at the meeting on 27 February 2024 about each point of concern raised by the claimant (page 522). He saw no evidence to support the allegations and saw no justification for taking further action, but remained happy to discuss. He emailed this note to her on 11 March 2024 (page 521).

125. On 11 March 2024 Ms Ahmed produced her investigation report into the claimant’s grievance. Ms Ahmed states in the Executive Summary: “From the evidence seen as part of this investigation, the overall recommendation is that there is no case to answer. The evidence I have seen does not suggest that Nina and/or Rachel set out to disadvantage Francesca, nor that their treatment towards Francesca amounted to a breach of the Civil Service Code. I can find no evidence to support the claim of discrimination from the evidence obtained.”

126. On 19 March 2024 the claimant responded to Mr North’s email of 11 March, asking for her victimisation complaint to be dealt with formally. Mr North forwarded this to Ms Sparkes on 21 March 2024 asking her to investigate despite his reservations as to whether a full investigation was required or justified (page 707).

127. The claimant received her ACAS early conciliation certificate on 20 March 2024.

128. On 26 March 2024 Mr North held a meeting with the claimant to deliver the outcome of the grievance, which was not upheld. Mediation was again recommended. The claimant was given a letter dated 26 March 2024 confirming the outcome and setting out the procedure for any appeal (page 602). Mr North also produced a note of the meeting the following day (page 604). We accept his evidence, which accords with the note of the meeting, that at this meeting the claimant was asked about her Workday qualifications, and she stated that she was not prepared to share the evidence of having them. The note was subsequently sent to the claimant.

129. The day before this, on 25 March 2024, Ms Taylor emailed the claimant in relation to a carers leave project which she was supporting, and offering that she could continue with the Testrail project or if she preferred could take on a different project, namely bereaved parents leave. It was noted that the claimant had technical capability to deliver it and as such it would take less oversight so that she would find it less stressful.

130. A one to one meeting was held between the claimant, Mr Coombes and Ms Taylor on 28 March 2024 about various matters, including the work the claimant should be undertaking. This was confirmed by email from Mr Coombes at 17.18pm (page 613), in which he noted that the claimant had said it had been hard to undertake the carer’s leave project due to this requiring a functioning relationship between her and Ms Taylor, and did not feel she could work on another project at this time. The claimant had suggested Zendesk queries however Mr Coombes did not feel this would help or negate Ms Taylor’s involvement. He noted that the claimant had been tasked with Testrail script writing which was still needed. Ms Taylor also emailed the claimant 17.35pm stating that the focus of her work for the next couple of weeks was to be on building out the test library on Testrail (page 617).

131. The claimant sent an appeal against the grievance outcome dated 8 April 2024.

132. The claimant presented her first claim on 10 April 2024.

133. On 11 April 2024 the claimant had a one to one meeting with Mr Coombes. The claimant emailed Mr Coombes at 1.44pm. In this she discusses the work she had been tasked with: “As you know I asked you on 28 March if I could resume working on Zendesk you consulted with Nina and declined my request, and you both agreed I should work in isolation on Testrail as no other person in the entire DfE uses the system, so I have had no interaction with any other person, you also raised in our meeting of 28 March that working Zendesk would give exposure to Rachel Smith and you weren't sure how that would work. I would also like to let you know, working on testrail, creating test scripts, soley has been very demoralising, and has negatively impacted, both for my mental health and my career, as a workday analyst. I also would like you to be aware that no other team members in the development team have contributed to testrail populating test scripts, prior to the workday external data load that went in the year 2021.”

134. Mr Coombes responded on the same day with a lengthy email. He confirmed the claimant should be attending team meetings. He noted that the claimant was looking for work that struck a balance between work that did not require the sort of relationship with himself, Ms Taylor and Ms Smith that project work required, and work that was not demoralising due to its repetitive nature as this risked negatively impacting on the claimant’s health and career. He noted that the claimant was not making the progress expected on Testrail. He asked that she continue with the Testrail work for now which he considered what work was available that can minimise the risks she felt the current work was causing.

135. On 12 April 2024 a team meeting was held. The claimant alleges that after the meeting concluded, her colleagues Mr Lomas and Mr Wilson restarted the meeting without her, which went on for 43 minutes.

136. We have seen a screenshot of the times at which participants entered and left the meeting (page 758). The meeting was started by Mr Lomas at 9.30.15am, and Mr Wilson joined around 20 seconds later, and the claimant a further 7 seconds after that. The meeting lasted around 8 minutes. A third colleague dialled in at 9.58.21am, and left at 9.58.41am, within a second of Mr Lomas and Mr Wilson rejoining. The claimant also rejoined a few minutes later at 10.02.56am but only for 14 seconds. Mr Lomas and Mr Wilson were on the call until 10.23.16am, at which point only Mr Wilson remained on the call on his own until 10.42.10am.

137. At 11.28am the claimant emailed Mr Coombes: “I have been subject to victimisation yet again. On your instruction I attended the Dev team meeting today. The eight-minute meeting below consisted of talk about easter eggs and other social things. it was very awkward to say the least as no one was talking about work. I took the initiative and asked should we terminate seen as no one is speaking, they both agreed.

The meeting ended at 9.38

They then start the meeting again at 09.58 the meeting now lasts 43mins without my presence. It is clear the team is not comfortable with my presence on meetings and you asking me to attend has deeply affected my mental health

Please can this behaviour towards me be investigated.”

138. At 11.34am the claimant sent a further email to Mr Coombes responding to his email of the previous day, reiterating that her mental health had suffered on the tasks set and seeking an occupational health referral for the workplace stress she was experiencing.

139. Mr Coombes emailed the claimant at 11.36am, at which point there had been a chat from the claimant (at 11.27am) saying that she wasn’t feeling well and was leaving work for the day. He asked her to share the reason for her absence when she was feeling better. We infer that he had not at that point read the email of 11.34am.

140. At 12.35pm the claimant replied she had spoken to her GP and was experiencing work related stress.

141. At 15.20pm the same day Mr Coombes sent a further email replying to the 11.34am email and setting out the support he felt had been offered to the claimant and asking what she wanted occupational health to advise on (page 645). The email opens as follows: “It is really important that I am clear with you, as you recognise, the support that is being provided and is available to you, which is the main purpose of this email. Firstly, as I and Phil have recognised on a number of occasions with you, the currents processes in train are hard and putting a strain both on your and others. I set out in previous emails how we are looking to support you through these process, whilst recognising that relationships have broken down with your previous line managers and to an extent myself that this can feel very hard for all and potentially is impacting how much you feel you are able to access the support we are offering.”

142. Later that day the claimant sought assistance from a mental health first aider.

143. On 15 April 2024 the claimant responded to Mr Coombes’ most recent email: “I raised my mental health concerns with you regarding the challenges I faced during the time you had off over Easter, regarding the work that had been set in an email to you on 11 April, you responded by setting another meeting for 12 April to further discuss my work even though we already met on 11 April, along with Nina to discuss what I had done to date. You then set the additional meeting on 12 April to further discuss what we already discussed; this heightened my stress levels as I could not see any positive reason to discuss the work over again, in yet another meeting. At no point can I recall that as my Line Manager, you have signposted to services, that may be able to support me, during my return to work in this challenging time, please correct me if I've missed when you have. I myself, did manage in my state, on Friday 12 April manage to seek out the Mental First Aider service, and reached out to someone on the list to see if I could get some advice as I was very anxious about our pending meeting scheduled for 2.30pm. You also insisted that I start attending team meetings again, which I did on Friday, I sent both yourself and Phil the evidence on how that went, that coupled with the above contributed greatly to my already high workplace stress levels. Your statement below of - "relationships have broken down with your previous line managers and to an extent myself" implies perhaps you may no longer have an unbiased approach to managing me, please can you clarify what you mean by this statement and why you feel this way towards managing me now? as I thought our Employee / Line Manager working relationship had made good progress throughout this challenging time.”

144. She then responded to points raised by Mr Coombes by annotating his email below in the chain.

145. On 17 April 2024 the claimant emailed Mr Coombes again

(emphasis in original):

“I would like to revert back to the below, sent to me on 12 April - as your statement in bolden is of concern to me. Can you elaborate on how you feel, yourself and my working relationship is broken down to an extent? Your statement of - "relationships have broken down with your

previous line managers and to an extent myself"