JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS

Claimant: Mr M Armstrong

Respondent: The Secretary of State for Justice

Heard at: Manchester On: 10-14 November 2025

Before: Employment Judge Phil Allen Mr B Rowen Dr H Vahramian

REPRESENTATION:

Claimant: Mr C Armstong, a relative Respondent: Mr R McLean, counsel

JUDGMENT

The unanimous judgment of the Tribunal is that:

1. The complaint of unfair dismissal is well-founded. The claimant was unfairly dismissed.

2. The compensation to be awarded to the claimant should be reduced by 40% applying Polkey, to reflect the chance that the claimant’s employment would have ended in a fair dismissal in any event (issue 8.3).

3. The complaint that the claimant’s dismissal was unfavourable treatment because of something arising in consequence of disability (issue 5.1.2) is well- founded and succeeds.

4. The complaint of failure to make reasonable adjustments for disability relying upon the argument that the reasonable adjustment which should have been made was not to have dismissed the claimant at the meeting on 11 December 2023 (issue 6.4.1) is well-founded and succeeds.

5. The complaints of direct disability discrimination are not well-founded and are dismissed.

6. The other complaint of unfavourable treatment because of something arising in consequence of disability is not well-founded and is dismissed.

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

7. The other complaints of failure to make reasonable adjustments for disability are not well-founded and are dismissed.

REASONS

Introduction

1. The claimant was employed by the respondent as an HM Prison Officer from 11 September 2019 until his dismissal on 11 December 2023. The claimant had a disability at the relevant time (PTSD). The claimant alleged that he was discriminated against on grounds of disability (direct discrimination, discrimination arising from disability and/or breach of the duty to make reasonable adjustments) and was unfairly dismissed. The respondent denied discrimination and contended that the dismissal was fair by reason of capability (health).

Claims and Issues

2. I conducted a preliminary hearing in the case on 19 August 2024. Appended to the case management order produced following that hearing was a draft list of issues. Included in the bundle for this hearing was an agreed updated list of issues (61). At the start of this hearing, the parties agreed that those were the issues to be determined. The list of the issues to be determined is appended to this case management order.

3. For issue 5.4, the respondent had included the legitimate aim(s) upon which he relied in his amended grounds of response at paragraph 35 (58). It/they were said to be: the need to ensure staff fitness for work in the light of medical advice, to ensure health and safety of all staff and service users, in compliance with the respondent’s policies, to manage staffing including ensuring adequate numbers of officers throughout the prison and ensuring proper operation of the prison.

4. We agreed at the start of the hearing that we would consider and determine the liability issues only (initially), but, when doing so, we would also consider and determine issue 8.3 (something which had been suggested would occur in the case management order produced following the preliminary hearing).

Procedure

5. The claimant was represented by Mr Armstrong, a relative (and lay representative). Mr McLean, counsel, represented the respondent.

6. The hearing was held in-person in Manchester with both parties and all witnesses attending Manchester Employment Tribunal.

7. We were provided with a bundle of documents which had 522 pages. We read the documents in the bundle to which we were referred. Where we refer to a number in square brackets in this Judgment, that is a reference to the page number in the bundle.

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

8. The claimant made an application to strike out the response. The application was made in a skeleton argument sent to the Tribunal on the day before the hearing. On the first morning, we heard the application and the respondent’s response. We agreed with the parties that they would consider some matters raised by us during the morning whilst we read the statements and documents, and they would then return after lunch with the claimant identifying the relevant document and the respondent’s counsel confirming the position regarding witness statements. We heard from each representative briefly after the lunch break and adjourned to consider our decision. We decided not to strike out the response and we informed the parties of that decision and our reasons for it. Those reasons are confirmed below.

9. We were provided with witness statements from each of the witnesses called to give evidence. We read those statements, together with the documents referred to in them or in the claimant’s skeleton argument, during the morning of the first day.

10. We heard evidence from the claimant, who was cross examined by the respondent’s representative, and we asked him questions. His evidence was heard on the first day and part of the morning of the second. As a reasonable adjustment, we agreed that we would take breaks when the claimant wished to do so. No other adjustments were sought or required.

11. We heard evidence from each of the following witnesses called by the respondent. Each were cross-examined by the claimant’s representative, and, where required, we asked questions (for Mr Knight we also asked some questions which needed to be asked to ensure that the claimant’s case was put to that witness, where the claimant had a lay representative). The respondent’s witnesses’ evidence was heard from part-way through the morning of the second day until the end of the third day. The witnesses were: Mr Wayne Howard, Custody Manager; Mr Simon Eve, formerly Residential Custody Manager and now Prison Learning Delivery Manager; Miss Michelle Metcalfe, formerly Deputy Governor at HMP Manchester and now Governing Governor of HMP Wakefield; Mr Robert Knight, Governing Governor of HMP Manchester; and Mr Gavin O’Malley, Prison Group Director.

12. When we were provided with witness statements, the respondent also provided a witness statement from Mr Nicholas Whitehead, formerly Temporary Custody Manager and now Senior Officer at HMP Hindley. He was not called to give evidence (we were told he was unwell) and therefore his evidence was given limited weight as he was not able to be cross-examined.

13. After the evidence was heard, each of the parties was given the opportunity to make submissions. They each made their submissions orally on the morning of the fourth day.

14. We adjourned to reach our decision and considered and made our decision during an adjournment for the remainder of the fourth day and the morning of the fifth day. We informed the parties of our Judgment, and the reasons for it, on the afternoon of the fifth day.

15. As written reasons were requested, the Judgment and the reasons for it are contained in this document.

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

Application to strike out

16. The application to strike out the response was made under rules 38(1)(b), (c) and (e) of the Employment Tribunal rules of procedure. That was confirmed by the claimant’s representative orally. The application as written had appeared to have been made under rule 38(1)(a) (on the basis that it was said the response had no reasonable prospect of success) but that was not pursued orally. We confirmed that we would not have struck out the response on that basis even had the application been pursued. We had five days set aside to hear the case and the evidence. There was a response, and the merits would need to be determined on the evidence. For an application to strike out, we would have been required to take the respondent’s case at its highest and, if doing so, it could not be said that he had no reasonable prospects of success.

17. We considered the application under rules 38(1)(b), (c) and (e) together. We will not reproduce precisely what is said in those rules in this Judgment, but we confirmed what they said when we informed the parties of our decision.

18. There was an issue regarding comparator documents. In summary, the claimant made an application for disclosure of comparator documents after the respondent had objected to disclosing what was sought. Employment Judge Leach determined that application on 20 May 2025, when he ordered that some information should be provided by the respondent, but he refused the application for specific disclosure. There was an application for reconsideration, which he determined on 24 June 2025 (when the decision made was not varied). The respondent provided the information it was ordered to provide (albeit the information it provided was limited).

19. There was an issue raised about a list of those appointed to the Externals role, which the claimant believed had been sent to others. When the claimant had sought that document, the respondent had informed him on 18 August 2025 (370) that the member of staff who may have a list or may have sent the list, was not currently in work, with no set return to work date at the time of the response. We were informed that the position remained unchanged as at the start of this hearing. It was surprising that no further steps had been taken, but we confirmed that the claimant would be able to highlight the absence of that document and would be able to ask questions about it.

20. There had also been an issue regarding witness statements. The parties had been ordered to send their witness statements to the other party by 23 June 2025. The respondent made an application to extend the time given to do so. Unfortunately, the Tribunal had not made a decision on the application until 24 June. The claimant sent his witness statement to the respondent as he had been ordered to do. Time was extended following the application (to 23 July 2025). After a further application on 25 June 2025, time was extended to 1 September 2025 (with that decision having been on 29 July 2025). Witness statements were sent by the parties to each other on 1 September. Each party has had the other party’s witness statements for two and a half months.

21. We did not find that the respondent’s conduct of proceedings had been scandalous, unreasonable, or vexatious.

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

22. There had been compliance with the orders of the Tribunal, save that the respondent had not provided its witness statements on the date it had originally been ordered to, a date which had retrospectively been extended by the Tribunal. We confirmed that the claimant would be able to ask questions of the respondent’s witnesses about having his first witness statement when theirs were prepared, and he could make submissions based upon the timing of provision of witness statements.

23. We found that a fair hearing remained possible. We decided we would not strike out the response.

Facts

24. The claimant worked for the respondent from 11 March 2019.

25. The claimant has PTSD. It was a pre-existing condition when he started working for the respondent. The respondent accepted that the claimant had a disability at the relevant time as a result of his PTSD.

26. The respondent has a detailed attendance management policy (288). We will not reproduce in detail the content of the policy, but we took into account what it said, as it was a key element of the documentation to which we were referred. Paragraph 2.45 (299) defined a trigger point for managing unsatisfactory attendance. Paragraph 2.51 (300) set out the formal decision points during formal action for unsatisfactory attendance (first written warning, final written warning, and downgrade/regrade or dismissal). Continuous absence was addressed from paragraph 2.72 onwards (302) and it was stated that a continuous period of sickness absence was one which reached fourteen calendar days. Paragraphs 2.75 and 2.76

(303) addressed meetings during continuous sickness absence, including Formal Attendance Review Meetings (FARM) which were due to take place after twenty- eight calendar days, another after three months absence, and every quarter thereafter. What a FARM was, and what was to be considered, were addressed at paragraphs 2.83 to 2.95 (304). It was said that decisions on dismissal were to be taken by the Governor in a prison and must be considered where attendance had not improved following a final written improvement warning or where a return to work was not expected within a reasonable time frame during a period of continuous absence. The policy also set out the process for appeals. Annex C contained a checklist for referring a case to a decision manager (316).

27. The claimant was employed as a Prison Officer. He was usually allocated to a specific wing. During the last two years of his employment, the claimant undertook a lot of overtime particularly in Externals, something which he enjoyed.

28. We were provided with a table which recorded the claimant’s ill health absences (101) taken from the respondent’s SOP system. The claimant was absent for three working days in early December 2019 due to influenza and a further three days later that month due to vomiting and sickness. The claimant was absent for five days in May 2020 due to nervous system – migraines and headaches (albeit that was recorded as being no working days lost). He was absent for fourteen working days in June 2020 due to anxiety and depression. The claimant was absent for two days in January 2021 due to infectious and parasitic (recorded as a null). He was

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

absent for two days in November 2021 due to digestive system (also recorded as a null). He was absent for ten working days in December 2021 due to respiratory system – influenza. The table also recorded absences from April 2022, which are addressed below as an absence management process was followed. The table recorded some absence due to Covid, however it appeared to be common ground that those absences should not be taken into account. The table showed that (putting Covid aside) from the start of his employment in March 2019 until the end of March 2022, the claimant was absent for a total of thirty-nine working days. We heard no evidence about any absence management undertaken throughout that period. The table also recorded a later period of absence which arose from an injury suffered at work, and which it appeared the respondent had chosen not to formally address as it was not addressed in the subsequent meetings and letters.

29. It was Mr Howard’s evidence that a Formal Attendance Review Meeting took place with the claimant on 30 September 2022. It was his evidence that it had been his intention to issue the claimant with a stage one written improvement warning. He said he appreciated that the wording of the letter was not clear. He updated the SOP system with the information that the claimant had been given a stage one improvement warning.

30. The claimant was sent the letter on 1 October 2022 (dated 30 September) from Mr Howard, his line manager (77). The covering email referred to it as a sick warning. The absences to which it related were six days of absence in April 2022 due to anxiety and depression and eleven days of absence in August 2022 due to (what was described as) digestive system. The letter (78) was headed “outcome of formal attendance meeting”, it referred to the meeting on 30 September and said: “the purpose of which was to give us the opportunity to discuss the concerns about your attendance. In particular I pointed out that you had taken a total of 17 days in 2 absence periods over the last twelve months. I am not pursuing formal action on this occasion, however, in the event that your attendance does not improve a further formal attendance meeting will be held to review the circumstances of your sickness absence”

31. The letter did not contain a formal warning. The letter expressly said that Mr Howard was not pursuing formal action. The information which Mr Howard recorded on the SOP system was not correct.

32. Following a further period of absence, Mr Howard’s evidence was that a further Formal Attendance Review Meeting took place with the claimant on 7 March 2023. It was his evidence that he informed the claimant he would be issuing him with a final written warning. The claimant did not believe he had been issued with a final written warning.

33. The claimant was sent an email and letter about his absence on 7 March 2023 from Mr Howard, following the meeting of the same date. The email (83) referred to a copy of the claimant’s sick warning notification. The meeting had followed eight days of absence in January 2023 recorded as being due to respiratory system – other. The letter referred to the meeting and said:

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

“the purpose of which was to give us the opportunity to discuss the concerns about your attendance. In particular I pointed out that you had taken a total of 8 days in 1 absence periods over the last twelve months. I am not pursuing formal action on this occasion. Your existing improvement warning remains in place and your improvement period continues to apply. In the event that your attendance does not improve a further formal attendance meeting will be held to review the circumstances of your sickness absence”

34. It was Mr Howard’s evidence that the second absence letter was sent in error. It should have been a final written warning. It was not. In his witness statement he said he had used the wrong template, and the letter therefore did not state that the claimant had been issued with a final written improvement warning. Mr Howard recorded on the respondent’s SOP system that the claimant had been issued with a final written warning. This was referred to by Mr Howard as being simply an administrative error on his part. The outcome was that the SOP system recorded the claimant as having received both a first and final written warning, when in fact the claimant had not received any written warnings at all.

35. The respondent undertook a prison reprofile exercise. As part of that exercise, expressions of interest in two types of work/role (Externals and Visits) were sought (on two occasions). The claimant expressed an interest in an Externals role on 9 July 2023 (339). He also completed a statement of suitability (342). Mr Whitehead informed the claimant that he would be a good fit for the role. The claimant did not express an interest in or complete a statement for a role in the visits/activities group and his evidence to us was that he preferred to continue working on the wing to undertaking a role in the Visits group. It was Miss Metcalfe’s evidence that she chaired the rotation meeting at which the allocation of staff was considered. In her evidence to us, she emphasised that the process was not equivalent to that for a recruitment exercise, it was about allocating band three Prison Officers to work which fell within the duties of that role and which a Prison Officer could be asked to undertake.

36. The expressions of interest were considered. The allocation of roles was discussed at a meeting of the senior management team on 10 August 2023. The discussion was not noted. Miss Metcalfe chaired the meeting and gave evidence about what was discussed and the broad reasons for making the decisions. They included the need for balance in the prison between areas and roles, including of experience and (for certain specific tasks) gender. It was Miss Metcalfe’s evidence that the claimant was not appointed to work in Externals, the area in which he had expressed an interest. He was placed in Visits, an area in which he had not expressed an interest. Nobody evidenced precisely why that decision was made. Miss Metcalfe gave evidence about the process but could not recall why the claimant was not successful. He was not alone in being placed in an area which he did not want, as we were shown an exchange of emails with somebody else who was unhappy. Miss Metcalfe was clear in her evidence that there were no discussions about levels of sickness absence, medical conditions or disabilities at the meeting and those things were not a factor in the decisions made.

37. Mr Howard ceased to be the claimant’s manager in July 2023. We heard no evidence that anyone managed the claimant between July and October 2023,

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

although Mr Knight believed that a manager’s manager would have been the identified manager when there was no direct line manager.

38. The claimant worked a week of nights in early August, followed by a rest week and then two weeks annual leave. He returned to work on 29 August. After working that week, the claimant commenced an extended period of ill health absence on 4 September 2023. He did not return from that period of absence.

39. The evidence was not entirely clear about what and when the claimant was informed about the decision on the role allocations. In his witness statement, the claimant said that Mr Whitehead told him that he had obtained the Externals role, but he wasn’t sure when it started. In his statement, Mr Whitehead said that he had not done so, and he played no part in what he described as the recruitment process for the role. As we heard from the claimant but not from Mr Whitehead, we accepted the claimant’s evidence that Mr Whitehead told him what the claimant evidenced. However, we also accepted the respondent’s submission that, irrespective of what Mr Whitehead said, it was not in his gift to make the appointment. We also noted that the claimant was clearly not entirely certain about the position, in the light of what was subsequently recorded in the occupational health report of 12 October. The respondent provided no email or document which showed the claimant being informed about the outcome of the process or being told where he was now being required to work.

40. In the course of the disclosure exercise, the claimant asked about a spreadsheet which he believed had been circulated and which showed that he had been appointed to Externals. The claimant’s belief was based upon a text message he had received from a colleague on 13 October 2023 (377) in which she told the claimant that she had seen him on the list. As we have already recorded, the respondent’s reply to the question was (370) that the member of staff who may have a list or may have sent the list, was not currently in work, with no set return to work date at the time of the response. We were informed that the position remained unchanged as at the start of this hearing. None of the witnesses from whom we heard, gave evidence about such a list.

41. An occupational health report was obtained dated 29 September 2023 (125). It was positive about the prognosis and said the claimant would be fit enough to return to work after two weeks, with a phased return to work.

42. Mr Eve became the claimant’s line manager in October 2023. He prepared a log which contained all of the contact with the claimant (102) which the claimant agreed was accurate. It is not necessary for us to reproduce all the contact in this Judgment. Mr Eve spoke to the claimant by phone on 3 October 2023 and sent him a summary of the conversation the following day.

43. A further occupational health report was obtained dated 12 October 2023 (165). That was also positive about the claimant’s prognosis and said he would be fit enough to return to work within the next two weeks. It advised that the claimant should return on a phased return to work. It said that the claimant would be fit to perform his full duties if his improvement at the time continued. It also commented,

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

“Mr Armstrong informs me he has potentially obtained an altered role previous to his going off sick. He is concerned he may have missed this opportunity due to his absence, and this is an identified stressor for him. I would suggest this is clarified for him, as uncertainty is often a key difficulty for individuals suffering from PTSD/symptoms of anxiety”

44. On 23 October the claimant emailed Mr Eve (169) and said that he had seen that he was down for video link for two weeks, when he had never applied for Visits, only Externals. He said he was under the impression he would be moving to Externals. He said he did not want to work on Visits as it was a mundane and boring job. Mr Eve did not respond. Both Miss Metcalfe and Mr Knight evidenced that it was normal practice for the management of someone absent on ill health grounds to remain unchanged where possible until their return. On 25 October the claimant sent a further email saying he was very stressed about coming back and annoyed about being taken off Externals, he made a rude and inappropriate comment about those working on Visits. In his evidence in the Tribunal hearing, the claimant explained that he had found out that whilst he was off sick, he had been moved to a job which he had never applied for. He said his mental health took a massive dip.

45. By agreement with the claimant, a meeting took place in a Costa coffee shop on 9 November 2023. It was attended by both Mr Howard and Mr Eve, because the claimant had asked that Mr Howard remain his manager. Mr Eve took notes, which the claimant accepted were accurate (111). The claimant explained that he had ceased taking the medication when he had felt better and that had been a bad decision. He said that his anxiety had also been set off when found that he was being changed to Visits. The claimant was reassured that in Visits he would not be working with a manager with whom he had serious issues, as he would be working with a different manager. A phased or restricted return to work was discussed and the claimant said he did not want it/them. The claimant was told that he would be referred to occupational health, with a consideration for ill health retirement. He was also told that there would be a Formal Attendance Review Meeting to be chaired by the Governor. The notes said that the claimant was also told that he would be due an unacceptable attendance warning stage three, and this would form part of the FARM. Mr Eve said he would accompany the claimant to the meeting if he wanted it. From the notes, it appeared to be the case that the claimant accepted Mr Eve as his line manager, and it was clear from Mr Eve’s evidence at this hearing that Mr Eve believed that to be the case.

46. The attendance management policy provides that decisions on dismissal are taken by the Governor of the prison. From Mr Eve’s evidence it was clear that the arrangements for who would hear a Formal Attendance Review Meeting depended upon the point reached in the formal process. If there had already been a stage one warning and a stage two final warning, the SOP system proposed that there would be a FARM to be heard by a Governor. Where those things were not recorded, a FARM meeting with a more junior manager, such as Mr Eve, would be arranged, as Mr Eve did not have the authority to dismiss. Mr Eve explained the difference in focus between the two types of FARM meeting and emphasised that his focus was on trying to facilitate a return to work. As a result of the incorrect information recorded on the SOP system about warnings issued to the claimant, a potential- dismissal FARM was arranged with the Governor. Had the SOP system correctly recorded that no warnings had been issued to the claimant (or even had it recorded

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

only one warning), based upon Mr Eve’s evidence, the FARM meeting arranged would have been only with Mr Eve not the Governor, and dismissal would not have been considered (or possible). Mr Eve worked only from the information on the SOP system, he did not look at the letters which had actually been sent to the claimant.

47. The evidence of Miss Metcalfe about what prompted the FARM heard by the Governor was slightly different. She evidenced that she chaired weekly attendance meetings with managers and HR. Absences were discussed. She recalled the claimant’s “high” level of absence being discussed at those meetings. It was her evidence that it having been drawn to her attention, she made the decision that the claimant be referred to a FARM meeting before the Governor.

48. The claimant failed to attend one occupational health appointment, but after attending a later one, a further occupational health report was provided on 29 November 2023 (213). The report explained that three or four weeks before the claimant had been ready to return to work but had stopped his antidepressants “and the symptoms came back with a vengeance”. It was stated that the claimant hoped to return to work when his symptoms improved. The report went on to say that the claimant, “is unfit for work in any capacity due to the symptoms he reports. There are no management actions or workplace adjustments that are likely to expedite his recovery or support a return to work at this time … Once his mental health symptoms do start to improve, he could attempt a phased return to work, and I anticipate it could take a few months until he feels well enough to return when his medications take full effect”

49. No date for a likely return was provided. The current outlook was described: “he remains vulnerable to further episodes of his condition, the frequency and intensity of which cannot be predicted. The expectation is that his symptoms will improve over time, but he requires an ongoing review of his treatment and possibly adjustment to his current treatment for this to be achieved. Although I cannot provide you with a clear date of when he may be able to return to work, there is no indication of long-term, permanent incapacity at this stage”

50. In answer to a specific question asked about whether the claimant had a medical condition that would prevent him from performing the roles and responsibilities of a band 3 Prison Officer, the reply was, “The expectation is that his symptoms will improve over time and he will return to his full operational role”

51. A letter of 3 December 2023 (218) informed the claimant that his entitlement to full sick pay would cease in January 2024 and from 2 January 2024 he would be paid at half pay (plus SSP if SSP was still payable).

52. On 4 December 2023 the claimant emailed Mr Eve and said he had just collected his sick note. He said that he would want to look at coming back before it ran out (119). In evidence, the claimant placed considerable emphasis on that statement as showing that he had identified when he thought he would be able to

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

return to work. The relevant fit note (224) was dated 4 December 2023 and recorded that the claimant was not fit for work from 24 November 2023 until 28 December 2023 due to anxiety with depression.

53. The claimant was invited to a formal attendance review meeting in a letter of 28 November 2023 (207). The letter set out clearly that there were four possible outcomes to the meeting, including dismissal or what was said to be “whether your sick absence level should continue to be supported at this time”. The right to be accompanied was set out. The policy was referred to and it was recommended that the claimant read it. As quoted, the letter expressly addressed sick absence level and not current continuous absence.

54. The invite letter did not explain what materials or records would be considered at the meeting and copies were not provided. No record of absence was summarised in the letter. The letter did not refer to any warnings which would be taken into account. Copies of relevant documents were not provided.

55. When the claimant was asked about preparing for the formal attendance review meeting in December 2023, he explained that he had not been given anything to prepare with, as he was not given copies of any of the documents to be considered in order to prepare. It was Mr Eve’s evidence that Mr Knight was provided with a pack of documents including absence records and something which recorded the warnings as recorded on the SOP system (albeit we were not provided with a copy). It was the evidence of both Mr Eve and Mr Knight that Mr Knight was provided with Mr Eve’s full timeline document (which recorded the claimant as having said on the 4 December that he was looking to come back to work when his sick note ran out). Mr Knight was also provided with the fit notes, including the latest one which ran to 28 December. No one provided a set of the relevant documents to the claimant. It was Mr Eve’s evidence that the claimant could access the information on the system, although he agreed when asked that, if he was absent from work, he could only do so by telephoning shared services. Mr Eve did not provide the claimant with a set of the documents which he provided to Mr Knight.

56. At annex C to the attendance management policy (316), there was a checklist for a referral to a decision manager. That listed a number of things which it said should normally be provided to the decision manager to enable them to make a decision. We have already referred to the documents provided, but some of the recommended information was not. One of the things recommended was that the decision-maker be provided with copies of any letters issued. They were not in this case. It is unfortunate they were not obtained and provided as, if they had been, Mr Eve or Mr Knight would have been likely to have identified that what was recorded on the SOP system was an error and the letters provided to the claimant had not given the relevant warning or final written warning. The list also said that the decision-maker should be provided with the reasons why the business could no longer support the sickness absence. That was not specifically done in this case. Mr Knight considered that the full timeline provided by Mr Eve was his way of providing the reasons for the referral.

57. In his evidence, Mr Knight said that when looking at the documents produced for the purposes of these Tribunal proceedings, he learned that the two attendance

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

warnings issued to the claimant were not properly issued and he said they were not effective. At the time, he believed that the claimant was at the final warning stage.

58. The formal attendance review meeting was held on 11 December 2023 and was conducted by Mr Knight. We were provided with notes (234). At the start of the meeting, Mr Knight introduced the attendees and noted that dismissal was a formal option which could be discussed. He read from the November occupational health report. He noted that the claimant’s condition would be likely to be a disability. He asked the claimant how he was feeling. The claimant’s response was detailed in the notes. He said he was feeling better than he had been three weeks before. The notes went on to record, “MA explained that sometimes he felt great and then sometimes he had bad days. MA explained that bad days could happen at any time, but he could have periods of days, weeks or months when he felt fine. MA stated that he believed he was productive when he was carrying out his duties as a Prison Officer and he liked his job … MA explained that he had stopped taking his medication when he had been feeling better”

59. In response, the notes recorded that Mr Knight raised his concerns about the claimant’s sickness absence record, “noting that it was terrible. RK noted that there was a spectrum of reasons for the numerous absences, and asked if it was likely that most of these absences were due to PTSD and not what had been reported. MA confirmed that he had covid a couple of times and a couple of times was ill with other things, but otherwise the absences were all due to PTSD, anxiety and depression”

60. We would observe that nothing in the meeting notes or Mr Knight’s evidence recorded that any attempt had been made to look at the precise periods of absence or the reasons for each absence (such as distinguishing between discounted absences for Covid, injury from work, and/or identifying those which were due to the PTSD and when those absences had occurred).

61. After the claimant was asked about what his doctor advised, he provided a lengthy answer in which he explained that he had not known that he had to ween himself off the medication slowly rather than having stopped it. He said he was trying to manage his symptoms as best he could.

62. The notes then recorded the following, which was erroneous as it was based upon what was recorded on the respondent’s system rather than what had been said in the letters sent to the claimant, “RK explained that if MA was back at work he would be on a level 3 warning. RK explained that he needed to decide what to do with MA. RK stated that MA would be aware of the difficult situation in the prison with regards to

staffing and so many staff being off sick …

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

RK explained that he could not sustain this level of sickness absence. RK asked if there was anything that could change this situation or any assurance that MA could give that his attendance would improve. MA stated that he could sometimes go through long periods without having any issues”

63. The claimant’s evidence was that he felt like everything he said in the meeting fell on deaf ears. We would observe that Mr Knight did not appear to have entered into any discussion with the claimant about when he would be able to return to work. In his witness statement, the claimant also said that he was not in the right frame of mind for the meeting, and he felt that, as soon as he went in the office, he could tell that the decision had already been made. Mr Eve, in his evidence, suggested that the FARM meeting was the opportunity for the claimant to explain things. Mr Eve’s view was that the claimant made no effort in the meeting. Mr Eve also emphasised that he attended the meeting to support the claimant, and we noted that he said nothing at all in the meeting and certainly did nothing to highlight any points which would assist the claimant.

64. It was the claimant’s evidence that after a two-minute adjournment he was called back into the meeting and was informed by Mr Knight that he was to be dismissed. He highlighted the limited time taken to decide on his career. The notes

(235) recorded that the meeting was adjourned for a few minutes before resuming, which Mr Eve agreed was the time he recalled it having taken.

65. After the adjournment, the notes recorded Mr Knight as having stated that, “he had been through all the information and had decided to dismiss MA because his absence levels were too high”.

66. In his evidence to us, Mr Knight explained that the meeting considered the claimant’s continuous absence and what he described as the occupational health advice that the claimant would not be returning to work in the foreseeable future. He contrasted that with what would have been considered in a hearing considering absence levels. We did not accept that such a clear contrast existed, for a meeting in which Mr Knight had expressly addressed what he described as a terrible absence record and where he was recorded as having stated that he had dismissed the claimant because his absence levels were too high.

67. In his witness statement for this Tribunal hearing, Mr Knight listed eleven reasons as being those why his decision was taken. We will not list them all in this Judgment (but considered them all). He relied upon the claimant’s ninety-eight consecutive days of absence and his previous absences (described as being significant). He emphasised the high levels of absence in the prison. When asked about that, he emphasised the particular challenges which arose for a prison from staff absences which could result in prisoners being locked in for longer and which could have an impact on staff and prisoner safety.

68. Mr Knight said that the claimant had offered no reassurances that his attendance would improve, and he said the claimant gave him the impression that he had no intention of returning to work. He contrasted that with the usual experience in

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

a FARM where employees attempt to persuade him that they wanted to return and could see themselves as returning.

69. Within the reasons given, Mr Knight stated that the prison’s process for recruitment did not allow him to recruit to cover ongoing absence. A recruitment could only be initiated where a resignation or dismissal had been confirmed.

70. As the last of his reasons, Mr Knight described that delaying the decision to dismiss to give the claimant more time to recover felt to him to be a poor option for the prison, where he said the position was that he was without any indication of progress being made or adjustments that could support a return to work.

71. As part of his decision, Mr Knight also decided what compensation the claimant should be awarded under the relevant scheme. He decided to award him 100% compensation. He did not reduce it.

72. The decision and the reasons for it were set out in a letter dated 14 December (237). Mr Knight commented on the claimant’s honesty about his condition and how it manifests. After commenting on re-grade and ill health retirement, the letter said, “I could not sustain the absence further as there was no indication of a return to work and additionally there was a likelihood of relapse in the future. I also noted that your current absence would have triggered a stage 3 formal meeting for consideration of the above options had you returned to work. After a short break we reconvened and I decided that I would dismiss you on the grounds medical inefficiency as there was no reasonable prospect of a return to work in the near future or the ability to give regular and effective service going forward”

73. The claimant appealed on 3 January 2024 (252).

74. The claimant was invited to an appeal hearing. In his evidence, Mr O’Malley listed the documents he considered prior to the appeal hearing.

75. The appeal hearing was conducted by Mr O’Malley, who was a senior manager removed from HMP Manchester. We were provided with notes (273). The claimant accepted that they were an accurate reflection of what was said in the meeting. Mr O’Malley summarised and went through each of the grounds of appeal which the claimant had raised. Near the start of the appeal meeting, after being asked if he was seeking reinstatement, the claimant said the following (276), “I think everything’s been broken to be honest. And I’ve seen the prison service for what it is. And how you get treated not just as this case, but just in general. On the day-to-day basis”

76. The claimant was asked if the remedy he was seeking was purely financial and he replied “yeah”.

77. The notes record the claimant as having spoken at some length and then he confirmed that he had said everything that he wished to. He criticised the content of

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

the final occupational health report, saying he felt it contradicted itself, and saying that the OH advisor had exaggerated. The claimant said that whilst it said it could be a few months, he had always tried to get back as soon as possible. In the meeting the claimant referred to having wanted to have got back by Christmas. It was Mr O’Malley’s evidence that he asked the claimant whether he considered himself currently unfit for work and he replied that he did. The claimant provided Mr O’Malley with the names of comparators A and B when asked about those he considered had been treated more favourably than he had been.

78. Following the appeal hearing, emails were exchanged between Ms White (Mr O’Malley’s secretary) and Mr Knight asking about comparators A and B who had been referred to in the appeal. Mr Knight provided a response (325). In doing so, he attached the relevant notes and letters for the two comparators. Those attachments were not disclosed to us. It was said that there was very little direct comparison.

79. For comparator A it was said, “I did adjourn the first FARM whilst we await IHR, but she was too ill to continue working … was dismissed under medical inefficiency once IHR refused … I can see no evidence of … treatment being more favourable, she was ill and unable to work, I only delayed her dismissal whilst we explored IHR (as policy dictates)”

80. For comparator B he compared the situation with the claimant and said, “does have a poor sick record, but he pleaded for another chance stating that many of the absences related to a domestic situation and his wife suffering with [details provided] …. I decided to give him a final chance, extending his final warning … he pleaded for a further chance and was given clear instruction that any similar continued absences would result in dismissal, whilst Morgan offered me very little in terms of wanting to keep his job. Morgan could not provide assurance that his attendance would improve, he was clear that he suffered with PTSD and this meant he could not deliver consistent and effective service moving forward.”

81. For this Tribunal hearing we were not provided with any documents about the comparators, save for the further information provided by the respondent in two emails and two tables, with one of the emails and the tables being provided in compliance with the order made for the provision of further information. The respondent chose not to provide us with any evidence about the lengths of time for which the comparators had been absent when decisions were made. He did confirm on 9 May 2025 (353) that one of the comparators had had twenty-seven absences between 2019 and 2023.

82. Whilst giving evidence, Mr Knight was asked about the comparators. He provided more detailed evidence about why it was that he considered the circumstances to not be comparable to the claimant. Comparator B was somebody in work but with a significant absence record (the twenty-seven occasions of absence documented), for which Mr Knight decided to give him a further chance at a FARM meeting and not dismiss him. After doing so, his absence did not improve, and he was subsequently dismissed following a further FARM. It was Mr Knight’s

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

evidence that the reason why he decided not to dismiss comparator A at a FARM was so that her entitlement to ill health retirement could be fully explored, which involved obtaining relevant medical reports for the independent assessor. After reports were obtained and ill health retirement was not possible, she was dismissed. Mr Knight explained why it was always considered appropriate to explore ill health retirement first before dismissing, where ill health retirement had been identified as a possibility.

83. The appeal outcome was provided in a letter of 20 February 2025 (265). The written decision was brief and only explicitly addressed some of the points which the claimant had raised in his appeal. Reliance was placed on the letter inviting the claimant to the FARM dated 28 November 2023 which had advised the claimant of the possible outcomes to be considered in the meeting, which was considered to have meant that the claimant had been made aware of the outcomes to be considered within the meeting. Mr O’Malley upheld the decision to dismiss.

84. In his evidence at this hearing, Mr O’Malley explained that he could have overturned the dismissal decision and could have asked for a further occupational health report (both being things he has done in other cases). He explained that, under the relevant policy in place at the time, he considered that the appeal hearing was a re-hearing of the claimant’s dismissal (whilst being one that took into account the grounds of appeal being pursued). In the notes of the hearing, Mr O’Malley described it as looking at the case with a fresh pair of eyes. Mr O’Malley’s conclusion was that the claimant’s dismissal was dealt with under the continued absence procedure, and, for that part of the procedure, a warning did not need to be issued prior to dismissal. In his evidence, Mr O’Malley also relied upon the fact that the claimant remained unfit for work five months after his absence had commenced as supporting the decision, albeit that from his statement and evidence that appeared to be based in part upon a mistaken belief that the claimant had remained employed pending his appeal, when in fact it was not in dispute that his employment had in fact been terminated with immediate effect (and pay in lieu) on 11 December 2023.

85. When the respondent entered his response at the Tribunal on 23 May 2024, he pleaded (30) that the claimant had been given a final written warning on 7 February 2023 and (32) expressly relied upon that warning (said to be that if the claimant’s attendance did not improve, he would be liable for dismissal), as being one of the factors which rendered the dismissal fair. At the preliminary hearing (case management) on 19 August 2024, the claimant’s position was that he was unaware of that final written warning. When he amended his response, the respondent deleted the statement that there had been a final written warning (53) and deleted the reliance placed upon it as being one of the factors which rendered the dismissal fair (55). He expressly pleaded that, as a final written warning had not been issued to the claimant, there could be no direct discrimination as a result (56).

86. In an email from the paralegal representing the respondent in the proceedings sent on 8 July 2025 in response to the order made by Employment Judge Leach (358), he said that comparator A had been dismissed on 3 February 2023 and comparator B had been dismissed on 28 February 2023.

87. We were also provided with two spreadsheets which showed warnings given to the two comparators. For comparator A (345) it was recorded that they were given

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

a first written warning on 4 February 2021. For comparator B (346) they had been issued with a first written warning on 29 July 2021, a first written warning on 3 October 2022, a final written warning on 8 December 2022, there had been consideration of dismissal in October 2023 (recorded as no – auto closed), a first written warning had not been imposed on 5 August 2024, a first written warning was then recorded on both 9 December 2024 and 7 January 2025 with the outcome being said to be yes-dismissal. Mr Knight acknowledged that the information provided from the SOP system was not very informative as it did not show the precise dates when decisions had been made.

88. From the spreadsheets, it was clear that the respondent had made an incorrect statement when responding to the Tribunal’s order about the dismissal date of comparator B, as it was impossible for both the date of dismissal and the dates of warnings provided to have been correct.

89. We found that all of the witnesses who attended the hearing and gave evidence (including the claimant), gave honest and truthful evidence. We accepted that they told us the truth, or at least what they believed to be the truth (we have separately addressed the basis for Mr Knight’s decision upon which we made findings).

90. This Judgment does not seek to address every point about which we heard or about which the parties disagreed. It only includes the points which we considered relevant to the issues which we needed to consider in order to decide if the claims succeeded or failed. If we have not mentioned a particular point, it does not mean that we have overlooked it, but rather we have either not considered it relevant to the issues we needed to determine or we have not considered it necessary to refer to in these reasons.

The Law

91. Section 98 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provides:

(1) In determining for the purposes of this Part whether the dismissal of an employee is fair or unfair, it is for the employer to show —

(a) the reason (or, if more than one, the principal reason) for the dismissal, and
(b) that it is either a reason falling within subsection (2)...

(2) A reason falls within this subsection if it—

(a) relates to the capability or qualifications of the employee for performing work of the kind which he was employed by the employer to do,

(3) In subsection (2)(a) —

(a) “capability”, in relation to an employee, means his capability assessed by reference to skill, aptitude, health or any other physical or mental quality, …

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

(4) [Where] the employer has fulfilled the requirements of subsection (1), the determination of the question whether the dismissal is fair or unfair (having regard to the reason shown by the employer)—

(a) depends on whether in the circumstances (including the size and administrative resources of the employer's undertaking) the employer acted reasonably or unreasonably in treating it as a sufficient reason for dismissing the employee, and
(b) shall be determined in accordance with equity and the substantial merits of the case.

92. In an unfair dismissal claim, the respondent bears the burden of proving, on the balance of probabilities, that the dismissal was for capability (health), being the reason relied upon. If the respondent fails to persuade us that it dismissed the claimant for that reason, the dismissal will be unfair.

93. If the respondent does persuade us that it did dismiss the claimant for that reason, the dismissal is only potentially fair. We must then go on and consider the general reasonableness of the dismissal under section 98(4) of the Employment Rights Act 1996. That section provides that the determination of the question of whether a dismissal is fair or unfair depends upon whether in the circumstances (including the respondent’s size and administrative resources) the respondent acted reasonably or unreasonably in treating capability as a sufficient reason for dismissing the claimant. That is to be determined in accordance with equity and the substantial merits of the case.

94. The proper application of the general test of fairness in section 98(4) has been addressed in a number of cases. We must not substitute our own decision for that of the employer. We must resist the temptation to test matters according to what we would have decided if we were in the respondent’s shoes. The question is rather whether the employer’s decision fell within the band of reasonable responses which a reasonable employer acting fairly could reach (the claimant’s representative reminded us of Iceland Frozen Foods Ltd v Jones [1983] ICR 17 in his submissions).

95. For a fair capability dismissal, a fair procedure is required. There is a need to consult the employee before making a decision and the employer should take account of the employee’s views. The employer must also take steps to find out about the true medical position and the likely prognosis. There should be consideration of other options. A fair process should be followed. In his submissions, the claimant’s representative referred us to East Lindsey District Council v Daubney [1977] ICR 566 and Polkey v AE Dayton Services Ltd [1987] IRLR 503 on the importance of consultation and discovering the true medical position.

96. It is essential, in every case, to consider whether, in all the circumstances, the employer could be expected to wait any longer for the employee to return (Spencer

v. Paragon Wallpapers Ltd [1977] ICR 301). We must expressly address that

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

question and balance the relevant factors in all the circumstances of the individual case (BS v Dundee City Council [2014] IRLR 131).

97. Dismissing an employee before they have exhausted their right to contractual sick pay will not necessarily be unfair, but it is one of the factors which can be taken into account when evaluating the overall fairness of the dismissal (Coulson v Felixstowe Dock & Railway Co [1975] IRLR 11).

98. In Lynock v Cereal Packaging Ltd [1988] IRLR 510 (a case which addressed dismissal for frequent absence rather than long-term continuing absence) Mr Justice Wood said: “The approach of an employer in this situation is, in our view, one to be based on those three words which we used earlier in our judgment – sympathy, understanding and compassion … every case must depend upon its own fact, and provided that the approach is right, the factors which may prove important to an employer in reaching what must inevitably have been a difficult decision, include perhaps some of the following – the nature of the illness; the likelihood of recurring or some other illness arising; the length of the various absences and the spaces of good health between them; the need of the employer for the work done by the particular employee; the impact of the absences on others who work with the employee; the adoption and the exercise carrying out of the policy; the important emphasis on a personal assessment in the ultimate decision and of course, the extent to which the difficulty of the situation and the position of the employer has been made clear to the employee so that the employee realises that the point of no return, the moment when the decision was ultimately being made may be approaching.”

99. We can review and take into account that there may have been reliance upon an erroneous warning when considering the fairness of the dismissal. We can consider whether reliance on the warning was unreasonable given the employer’s size and administrative resources. However, where the employer has erred in the operation of the policy is not conclusive (Sakharkar v Northern Foods Grocery Group Ltd (t/a Fox’s Biscuits) UKEAT/0442/10). The question is whether the respondent acted reasonably in dismissing the claimant.

100. In Polkey the House of Lords held that the fact that the employer can show that the claimant would have been dismissed anyway (even if a fair procedure had been adopted) does not make fair an otherwise unfair dismissal. However, such evidence (if accepted) may be taken into account when assessing compensation and can have a severely limiting effect on the compensatory award. If the evidence shows that the employee may have been dismissed properly in any event, if a proper procedure had been carried out, we should normally make a percentage assessment of the likelihood and apply that when assessing the compensation. In applying a Polkey reduction, we may have to speculate on uncertainties to a significant degree. The issue is what the respondent would have done and not what a hypothetical reasonable employer would have done in the circumstances. The onus is on the respondent to adduce evidence to show that the dismissal would (or might) have occurred in any event. However, we must have regard to all the evidence when making that assessment.

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

101. There will be circumstances where the nature of the evidence on which the respondent seeks to rely, is so unreliable that a Tribunal may take the view that the whole exercise of seeking to reconstruct what might have been, is so riddled with uncertainty that no sensible prediction based on that evidence can properly be made. Whether that is the position is a matter of impression and judgment for us to decide. But in reaching that decision we must recognise that we should have regard to any material and reliable evidence which might assist us in fixing just compensation, even if there are limits to the extent to which we can confidently predict what might have been; and we must appreciate that a degree of uncertainty is an inevitable feature of the exercise. The mere fact that an element of speculation is involved is not a reason for refusing to have regard to the evidence (Software 2000 Ltd v Andrews [2007] IRLR 568).

102. The direct discrimination claim relies on section 13 of the Equality Act 2010

which provides that:

“A person (A) discriminates against another (B) if, because of a protected characteristic, A treats B less favourably than A treats or would treat others.”

103. Section 39(2) of the Equality Act 2010 provides that an employer must not discriminate against an employee. It sets out various ways in which discrimination can occur, and these include any other detriment and dismissal. The characteristics protected by these provisions include disability.

104. In this case the respondent will have subjected the claimant to direct discrimination if, because of his disability, he treated him less favourably than he treated or would have treated others. Under Section 23(1) of the Equality Act 2010, when a comparison is made, there must be no material difference between the circumstances relating to each case. The requirement is that all relevant circumstances between the claimant and the comparator must be the same and not materially different. It is not a requirement that the situations have to be precisely the same.

105. Section 136 of the Equality Act 2010 sets out the manner in which the burden of proof operates in a discrimination case and provides as follows: “(2) If there are facts from which the Court could decide, in the absence of any other explanation, that a person (A) contravened the provision concerned, the Court must hold that the contravention occurred.

(3) But sub-section (2) does not apply if A shows that A did not contravene the provision”

106. In short, a two-stage approach is envisaged:

a. At the first stage, we must consider whether the claimant has proved facts on a balance of probabilities from which we could conclude, in the absence of an adequate explanation from the respondent, that the respondent committed an act of unlawful discrimination. This can be described as the prima facie case. However, it is not enough for the claimant to show merely that he has been treated less favourably than

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

his comparator and that he has a particular disability which they do not have; there must be something more.

b. The second stage is reached where a claimant has succeeded in making out a prima facie case. In that event, there is a reversal of the burden of proof: it shifts to the respondent. Section 123(2) of the Equality Act 2010 provides that we must uphold the claim unless the respondent proves that it did not commit (or is not to be treated as having committed) the alleged discriminatory act. The standard of proof is again the balance of probabilities. However, to discharge the burden of proof, there must be cogent evidence that the treatment was in no sense whatsoever because of the protected characteristic.

107. In most cases there is a need to consider the mental processes, whether conscious or unconscious, which led the alleged discriminator to do the act. Determining this can sometimes not be an easy enquiry, but we must draw appropriate inferences from the conduct of the alleged discriminator and the surrounding circumstances (with the assistance where necessary of the burden of proof provisions). The subject of the enquiry is the ground of, or the reason for, the alleged discriminator’s action, not his motive.

108. We need to be mindful of the fact that direct evidence of discrimination is rare, and that Tribunals frequently have to infer discrimination from all the material facts.

109. The protected characteristic does not have to be the only reason for the conduct, provided that it is an effective cause or a significant influence for the treatment.

110. The explanation for the less favourable treatment does not have to be a reasonable one. Unfair or unreasonable treatment by an employer does not of itself establish discriminatory treatment.

111. Section 15 of the Equality Act 2010 provides:

(1) A person (A) discriminates against a disabled person (B) if —

(a) A treats B unfavourably because of something arising in consequence of B's disability, and
(b) A cannot show that the treatment is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.

(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if A shows that A did not know, and could not reasonably have been expected to know, that B had the disability.

112. For unfavourable treatment there is no need for a comparison, as there is for direct discrimination. However, the treatment must be unfavourable, that is there must be something intrinsically disadvantageous to it.

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

113. The correct approach to be taken in such claims was set out by the Employment Appeal Tribunal in Pnaiser v NHS England [2016] IRLR 170. As those issues were not in dispute, we will not reproduce what was said in this Judgment. The claimant’s representative relied upon City of York Council v Grosset [2018] IRLR 746 in his submissions on dismissal arising from discrimination.

114. Section 15(1)(b) provides that unfavourable treatment can be justified where it is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. That requires: identification of the aim; determination of whether it is a legitimate aim; and a decision about whether the treatment was a proportionate means of achieving that aim. The test is an objective one, for which we must make our own assessment. We need to balance the real needs of the organisation against the discriminatory effect of the thing being justified.

115. For cases arising from a dismissal following absence, where there is both a discrimination arising from disability claim and an unfair dismissal claim, previous case law has indicated that the outcome is often the same, but It is also clear that there is not a necessary inconsistency between rejecting the claim of unfair dismissal and upholding a claim under Section 15 of the Equality Act 2010 in respect of that same dismissal.

116. We took account of the guidance in relation to objective justification contained in paras 5.11, 4.37 and 4.30 to 4.32 of the EHRC Code of Practice on Employment. It is for the respondent to justify the practice, and it is up to the respondent to produce evidence to support its assertion that it is justified. We must ask ourselves whether the aim is legal non-discriminatory and one that represents a real, objective consideration? We must then ask ourselves whether the means of achieving the aim is proportionate? Treatment will be proportionate if it is ‘an appropriate and necessary’ means of achieving a legitimate aim. Necessary does not mean that it is the only possible way of achieving the legitimate aim, it will be sufficient that the same aim could not be achieved by less discriminatory means.

117. Section 20 of the Equality Act 2010 imposes a duty to make reasonable adjustments on an employer. Section 20(3) provides that the duty comprises the requirement that where a provision, criterion or practice of the employer’s puts a person with a disability at a substantial disadvantage in relation to a relevant matter in comparison with people who do not have a disability, to take such steps as it is reasonable to have to take to avoid the disadvantage.

118. Section 21 of the Equality Act 2010 provides that a failure to comply with the requirement set out in section 20 is a failure to comply with a duty to make reasonable adjustments. Schedule 8 of the same Act also contains provisions regarding reasonable adjustments at work.

119. Environment Agency v Rowan [2008] IRLR 20 is authority that the matters a Tribunal must identify in relation to a claim of discrimination on the grounds of failure to make reasonable adjustments are:

a. the provision, criterion or practice applied by or on behalf of an employer;

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

b. the identity of non-disabled comparators (where appropriate); and
c. the nature and extent of the substantial disadvantage suffered by the claimant, including:
i. the nature of the claimant’s disability;
ii. why this disability placed the claimant at a substantial disadvantage;
iii. what the substantial disadvantage was.

120. The requirement can involve treating the person with the disability more favourably than others.

121. We are to objectively assess the issue of whether the person with the disability has been put at a substantial disadvantage and there must obviously be some causative nexus between the disability relied upon and the substantial disadvantage. We must consider the overall picture.

122. In assessing the efficacy of any proposed step, it is only necessary to establish that there was a real prospect of the step avoiding or reducing the relevant disadvantage.

123. The claimant’s representative reminded us of Archibald v Fife Council [2004] IRLR 651 in his submissions on the scope of the duty to make reasonable adjustments.

124. A duty to consult or consider adjustments is not of itself imposed by the duty to make reasonable adjustments, the only question is, objectively, whether the respondent has complied with its obligations to make reasonable adjustments or not. The duty involves the taking of substantive steps, rather than consulting about or considering what steps might be taken. The EHRC Code of Practice on Employment provides some information about when an adjustment is reasonable.

125. It is not necessary for us to outline the law on jurisdiction and time limits at any length in this Judgment. The claimant’s representative reminded us of Hendricks v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [2003] IRLR 96. Section 123 of the Equality Act 2010 provides that proceedings must be brought within the period of three months starting with the date of the act to which the complaint relates (subject to the extension for ACAS Early Conciliation). If the thing alleged is part of a continuing series of events, then the time runs from when the continuing series ceased. If the claim was otherwise brought out of time, we must decide whether it was brought in such other period as we think is just and equitable (section 123(1)(b). The most important part of determining whether it is just and equitable is to balance the respective prejudice to the parties, but we must assess all the relevant factors in the case including the length of, and the reasons for, the delay. The Limitation Act 1980 sets out the factors which are usually considered as confirmed in British Coal Corporation v Keeble [1997] IRLR 336 (which we will not reproduce), but Tribunals

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

have been warned that those factors only illuminate the task, they are not a checklist which must be rigidly adhered to.

126. In his submissions, the respondent’s counsel did not refer us to any specific case law.

Conclusions – applying the Law to the Facts

Unfair dismissal

127. We started by considering issue one which recorded the issues in the unfair dismissal claim.

128. Issue 1.1 recorded that it was not in dispute that the principal reason for dismissal was capability (ill health). We found that was the principal reason for the decision to dismiss the claimant. That is a potentially fair reason under section 98 of the Employment Rights Act 1996.

129. The list of issues at 1.2 set out the question which we were required to answer applying section 98(4) of the Employment Rights Act, namely whether the respondent act reasonably in all the circumstances, including the size of the organisation and administrative resources available, in treating capability (ill health) as a sufficient reason for the claimant’s dismissal. Issues 1.2.1 to 1.2.3 set out three particular issues which were part of that broader question. We considered all of those issues together.

130. As we have set out in the section on the law above, we took account of the importance of not substituting our own decision for that of the respondent. We reminded ourselves that we must resist the temptation to test matters according to what we would have decided if we were in the respondent’s shoes.

131. In determining whether the dismissal was unfair applying the test in section 98(4), we considered that the following factors were important or of particular relevance:

131.1 We must take account of the size and administrative resources of the respondent. The organisation for which the respondent is responsible is of a very significant size. We also noted the number of employees at HMP Manchester, where we were told that there were approximately three hundred band 3 Prison Officers employed;
131.2 On the 11 December 2023, being the date when he was dismissed, the claimant was certified as not fit for work under a fit note which expired on 28 December 2023;
131.3 On the date of dismissal, the claimant had been continuously absent from 4 September 2023 until 11 December 2023, which we were told was a total of ninety-eight days of continuous absence (that appearing to be actual days not working days). We considered that to be a lengthy period, but not a particularly lengthy period when considering the likelihood of dismissal by a comparably sized employer;

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

131.4 At the date when he was dismissed, the claimant was still in receipt of full contractual sick pay (218) and SSP. That was something which we were able to take into account as a factor;
131.5 The decision-maker thought that, and took into account that, the claimant had been given a formal warning and a final written warning about absence, when he had not. We understood that it was contended that Mr Knight only took account of the period of continuous absence, but we did not find that to have been the case from what was recorded in the notes of the FARM meeting on 11 December 2023. Soon after the meeting started, Mr Knight referred to the claimant’s absence record as being “terrible”. Mr Knight referred to whether some period of absence was unauthorised. Later in the meeting and shortly before adjourning, Mr Knight referred to the (erroneous) fact that the claimant would return to work to a level three warning. When he gave his decision orally (236), the words used by Mr Knight were that the decision was because the absence levels were too high. Those things being raised/said by Mr Knight in the FARM meeting were inconsistent with the argument that the decision was only about the period of continuous absence and meant that we found that the dismissal decision took into account the record of absences (and therefore the erroneous belief in warnings) as well as the period of continuous absence. The fact that the decision was based in part on an erroneous belief that the claimant had been given both a written warning and a final written warning, was something we viewed as a significant factor when determining the fairness of it;
131.6 If the claimant had not been erroneously recorded on the respondent’s systems as having received a warning and a final written warning, it was Mr Eve’s evidence that the SOP system would not have proposed a FARM meeting before the Governor, the next FARM meeting would have been one before Mr Eve (which could not have resulted in dismissal);
131.7 The impact of the claimant’s absence on the organisation of HMP Manchester was a relevant factor. Mr Knight evidenced the particular impact which absence had on the operation and that was a part of his reasoning. We accepted his evidence that absence and staffing is a particular issue when operating a prison, particularly because of the impact it may have on prisoners, and the safety of staff and prisoners;
131.8 We noted that, as the claimant was not given a final written warning, there was an absence of it being clearly and unequivocally made clear to the claimant in the way that a final written warning would, the effect which his absence had on the prison and that he was likely to be dismissed if his absence was repeated/sustained. That was a factor because of the reliance placed upon the absence record. However, we also found that the invitation to the FARM with the Governor did explicitly state what the outcome of that meeting could be;
131.9 Whilst we accepted the evidence we heard about absence levels generally; we noted that continuous absence has less of an impact on the operation of any organisation than frequent intermittent absence

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

because continuous absence can be planned for more easily (particularly than the level of intermittent absence shown by one of the comparators). We also noted that where there were approximately three hundred employees at the same grade employed with the flexibility to be able to work in any area of the prison, the impact of one person’s ongoing absence will be less than it would be for a smaller employer or for someone with bespoke skills/duties;

131.10 We accepted the importance which the respondent placed on addressing attendance and absence, as evidenced by Mr Knight and as demonstrated by Miss Metcalfe and the regular senior management team absence meetings which she chaired;
131.11 As we have recorded in the facts when considering the SOP absence record (101) and so far as it was possible to identify what that showed, the claimant had been absent for a total of thirty-nine working days over the three year period from March 2019 to March 2022 (ignoring Covid- related absence as it appeared to be agreed should be the approach). Some of that absence was disability related. The claimant had also been absent for seventeen days over two periods in April and August 2022 and eight days in January 2023, as those absences were recorded and appended to the letters sent to the claimant (which said no formal action was being taken). We did not find that to be a terrible level of absence, as it was described;
131.12 On 4 December 2023 the claimant told his manager that he was intending to return to work before his current fit note ran out, that is he envisaged returning to work before the end of December (and Mr Knight had a record of that when he made his decision);
131.13 The reason for the claimant’s absence at the time of his dismissal was PTSD. For somebody who had suffered from PTSD since before he started employment with the respondent, there had been spaces of good health between the disability-related absences;
131.14 The respondent had obtained recent advice from an occupational health advisor, having obtained three reports in a relatively short space of time. The respondent had taken steps to find out the true medical position;
131.15 Mr Knight placed some emphasis in his evidence on the fact that two previous occupational health reports had indicated that the claimant would be returning to work two weeks after they were written, and he had not done so. That appeared to be considered to show the claimant as being unreliable in returning or saying when he would return. We considered that the third occupational health report of 29 November 2023 (214) provided an explanation for why the previous belief/optimism had not transpired, when the explanation was provided that the claimant had stopped taking his medication and that had had a significant adverse effect. That explained why the claimant had not returned in the time previously indicated;

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

131.16 In the occupational health report of 12 October 2023 (165), the respondent was advised that uncertainty about the claimant’s position and the outcome of his expression of interest was having an adverse impact on his health. The respondent did not address that uncertainty, as it could and should have done by confirming the position in an email or document. There was, generally, a lack of transparency and poor communication about the claimant’s expression of interest in the Externals group/role and, where occupational health had identified the uncertainty as a potential additional stressor, the failure to address that was a relevant factor. Mr Eve did speak to the claimant about his understanding in the meeting on 9 November (but did not entirely resolve the uncertainty);
131.17 Clearly the occupational health report of 29 November 2023 (213) was of particular importance. That said that the claimant was hoping to return to work when his symptoms improved. It said that the claimant was unfit for work. No management actions or workplace adjustments would expedite his recovery. We found the key sentence in the final paragraph of the first page (213) about when the occupational health adviser anticipated his return to work, to be unclear and ambiguous, but it did say it could take a few months (an unclear phrase which could mean two months but obviously could mean more). However, on the second page of the report (214), it was said that there was no indication of a long-term, permanent incapacity and the expectation was that the symptoms would improve over time, and he would return to his full operational role. In his submissions, the respondent’s counsel said that the report confirmed that the claimant was unfit in any capacity and there was no indication that it might change. We did not find that to be correct, that was not what the report said at all. Mr Knight made reference to what was said about prognosis in the report in various ways during his evidence, including suggesting that it said there was no reasonable prospect of the claimant returning to work, which was also not what it said. The claimant’s representative questioned why the respondent could not have waited longer, with which we agreed (albeit we did not agree that should have been coupled with some form of reduced compensation arrangement, as was also suggested). We found that the report was not as clear as the respondent considered it was, felt that it was uncertain about recovery, and for a full and fair process it could have been clarified, or a further period could have been allowed to ascertain what the claimant’s prognosis for return was;
131.18 The claimant was given the opportunity to attend a meeting at which the position and the report was discussed, and he was allowed to have his say (we will address a particular issue with this in more detail when explaining what we considered in the discrimination arising from disability claim);
131.19 We considered that the claimant went into the FARM meeting effectively blind, as he was not provided with any of the documents which the decision-maker was considering (even if he could have requested them, someone in his position could not reasonably be expected to do so). It

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

was very difficult for the claimant to effectively raise issues and highlight points, when the documents were not provided to him (such as the absence record being used when the “terrible” observation was made). In any event, the pack of documents was incomplete as it included the erroneous SOP record of warnings and not the actual warning letters; and

131.20 We did take account of the fact that there was a full appeal process with an independent decision maker. We accepted the respondent’s submission that Mr O’Malley had a thorough and encyclopaedic knowledge of the policies. The appeal was conducted fairly, albeit Mr O’Malley appeared to have been under the misapprehension that the claimant was still employed at the time, when he wasn’t. We did note what the claimant said about his health at the appeal and what he was seeking from it but also noted that those (at least in part) reflected the decision to dismiss.

132. We considered all relevant factors including all of those we have explained above. We found that the respondent did not act reasonably in all the circumstances, in treating capability (ill health) as a sufficient reason for the claimant’s dismissal. It was not within the range of reasonable responses of a reasonable employer to have dismissed in the circumstances we have set out. Balancing all the relevant factors, and in the claimant’s personal circumstances, we found that the employer could have been expected to wait longer for the claimant’s return. We took account all relevant factors and all of the matters which we have described, but, of the relevant factors those which had the greatest significance in reaching our decision that the dismissal was unfair, were the misplaced belief and consideration of a record that the claimant had been given a warning/final written warning when he had not, the possibility that the claimant could return to work in late December 2023, January 2024 or shortly after (prior to, or only shortly after, his full sick pay ran out), and the length of the period of continuous absence.

133. As a result, we found that the dismissal of the claimant was unfair.

Direct disability discrimination

134. We next considered issue 4. Issues 4.1 to 4.3 set out the issues in the direct discrimination claim.

135. In issue 4.1.1 the claimant alleged that he had been given a final written warning on or around 7 February 2023. The claimant was not given a final written warning. As a result, that allegation of direct disability discrimination did not succeed.

136. In issue 4.1.2 the claimant alleged that the respondent had taken away his role in Externals. As we have addressed in the section on the facts, we found that the communication around the decisions made following the expression of interest, was somewhat lacking. However, we found that the role (or work in that area) was not taken away. The claimant was not appointed to work in the Externals area as he had requested to be.

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

137. It was Miss Metcalfe’s evidence that when the allocation of roles was decided on 10 August 2023, there was no discussions about levels of sickness absence, medical conditions or disabilities. We accepted that evidence. Those matters were not a factor in the decisions made and no account was taken of them (therefore including the claimant’s PTSD). As a result, we did not find that a hypothetical comparator without PTSD but otherwise in the same material circumstances as the claimant, would have been treated any differently. The decision on work allocation was not because of the claimant’s disability. There was not the required something more which shifted the burden of proof to show that it had been (or that a hypothetical comparator would have been treated more favourably).

138. Issue 4.1.3 was the dismissal. We found that a hypothetical comparator in the same material circumstances as the claimant but without PTSD would still have been dismissed by Mr Knight as the claimant was. We found that Mr Knight dismissed the claimant as a result of his absence (we found that to have been a decision about both absence levels and continuous absence). A comparator in the same material circumstances as the claimant would have had the same absence history, the same wrongly perceived warning and final written warning, the same period of continuous absence, and the same occupational health advice about return. Mr Knight would have also dismissed that hypothetical comparator without PTSD.

139. We did consider carefully what Mr Knight had said in his email of 20 February 2024 (325) explaining the dismissal, when he was asked about comparators by Mr O’Malley during the appeal process. In that email, Mr Knight did make an express reference to PTSD when explaining his decision. When asked about it, Mr Knight explained that he did so to differentiate what was being considered for the claimant in contrast to what was being considered for the comparators. As a result, we did not find that the statement used shifted the burden of proof or otherwise proved that the decision had been made because the cause of the claimant’s absence was PTSD.

140. We heard evidence and argument about the comparators. In practice, neither of the comparators were in materially the same circumstances as the claimant. One of the comparators had been absent very frequently but was not on a period of long- term absence when the initial decision not to dismiss was made. The other comparator was not dismissed because ill health retirement was to be further explored, something which did not apply to the claimant. Both were in fact dismissed eventually. As neither comparator was in materially the same circumstances as the claimant, he could not rely upon them as actual comparators. We did take into account what we heard when considering the position of a hypothetical comparator as the frequently absent comparator did show that Mr Knight did not always dismiss at a Governor’s FARM, but we did not find that Mr Knight’s acceptance of one employee’s commitment to improve their attendance showed that a hypothetical comparator in the same circumstances as the claimant without PTSD would have been treated differently.

141. As a result, we did not find that the respondent directly discriminated against the claimant in the ways alleged.

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

Discrimination arising from disability

142. We then considered the discrimination arising from disability complaint, for which the issues were set out at issues 5.1 to 5.4.

143. As we have already said, the claimant did not have the Externals role taken away from him as issue 5.1.1 asserted. However, we did consider that not being given a role for which he had completed an expression of interest and which he had worked in a lot when doing overtime, was unfavourable for the claimant. Obviously, being dismissed (5.1.2) was unfavourable treatment.

144. It was not in dispute that the claimant’s absence from work arose in consequence of the claimant’s disability (issue 5.2).

145. Issue 5.3 asked whether the unfavourable treatment was because the claimant was absent from work? The dismissal was (at least in part) because the claimant was absent from work. However, the decision not to place the claimant in Externals was not because the claimant was absent from work. We have already explained why the evidence of Miss Metcalfe meant that the answer to question 5.3, when considering 5.1.1, was no. Absence was not part of the decision-making process for role allocation at all.

146. We then needed to consider issue 5.4 as it applied to the dismissal. The issue was whether the dismissal was a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim? The aim relied upon (it was not entirely clear whether it was contended to be one aim or multiple aims, but it would not appear that anything material turned upon it): was set out by the respondent in his amended grounds of response at paragraph 35 (58) as: the need to ensure staff fitness for work in the light of medical advice, to ensure health and safety of all staff and service users, in compliance with the respondent’s policies, to manage staffing including ensuring adequate numbers of officers throughout the prison and ensuring proper operation of the prison. We found that to be a legitimate aim (or aims). It was legal, non-discriminatory, and one that represented a real objective consideration (or considerations).

147. What we then needed to decide was whether the dismissal of the claimant was a proportionate means of achieving that legitimate aim (or aims). We were required to balance the real needs of the respondent/prison against the discriminatory effect of the thing being justified (the dismissal). Dismissal of the claimant at the meeting on 11 December 2023 was clearly something which had a significant discriminatory effect for him. Undertaking the balance, we found that the dismissal at that point in time at that FARM meeting, was not a proportionate means of achieving the aim identified (or aims identified). In making that decision we considered the same factors as we have set out for the unfair dismissal complaint, and which we will not reproduce here. Applying those factors, we did not find the dismissal to be a proportionate means of achieving the aim (or aims) identified. We understood that the question was slightly different to that of fairness and considered that the procedural factors had slightly less importance when considering proportionality.

148. In his evidence, Mr Knight explained that the claimant’s demeanour at the FARM had been blasé and that appeared to have been a factor in his decision. He

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024

said that the claimant offered no reassurances that his attendance would improve, and he contrasted the claimant’s approach in the meeting to others who attempt to persuade him that they want to return and see themselves as doing so. We would observe that what Mr Knight might have been interpreting was the demeanour that would be expected of somebody with anxiety, depression and PTSD, particular someone who was having issues with their medication at the time. That was an observation which we had of the evidence heard. It was not a significant factor in our decision on discrimination arising from disability (the more significant factors have been set out in detail when determining the fairness of the dismissal), but it was something which we considered alongside those factors.

149. As a result, we found that the dismissal of the claimant was discrimination arising from disability. The decision made about the Externals role was not.

Breach of the duty to make reasonable adjustments

150. We then considered the claim for breach of the duty to make reasonable adjustments, and the issues set out at 6.1 to 6.5. It was not in dispute that the respondent did apply the PCPs as set out in the list of issues at 6.1.1 and 6.1.2 (and which we will not reproduce). It was also not in dispute that the PCPs placed the claimant at a substantial disadvantage compared to someone without his disability (issue 6.2). Knowledge was not an issue (6.3). That meant that the issue which determined the complaint was 6.4, whether the respondent had failed to make a reasonable adjustment (which would have avoided the disadvantage)?

151. The adjustment set out as issue 6.4.1 was not dismissing the claimant. We considered the adjustment to more specifically be not dismissing the claimant on 11 December 2023. The relevant factors in reaching that determination have already been set out when considering the fairness of the dismissal and whether the dismissal amounted to discrimination arising from the disability. We considered those same factors when determining the reasonableness of the adjustment (but will not reproduce them here). We found that the respondent did fail to make a reasonable adjustment when it dismissed the claimant on 11 December 2023 rather than not dismissing him at that meeting. The reasonable adjustment would have been to have deferred the decision to dismiss to a later date, taking account of the length of the fit note, the claimant’s commitment to returning to work in the near future, and what was said in the occupational health reports and the positive statements about future recovery. A further FARM could have been arranged in the future, and we found it would have been a reasonable adjustment to have done so (where the reason for the claimant’s absence at the time was PTSD, a disability).

152. The adjustment sought at issue 6.4.2 was extending the period before a decision was made. We have effectively already addressed that potential adjustment when considering issue 6.4.1 and therefore did not need to address it separately.

153. The adjustment contended at 6.4.3 was adjusting the trigger points. The claimant had been ordered to set out in further particulars how he contended they should have been adjusted, but he had not done so. The application of this adjustment to the claimant’s circumstances was not as clear as it might have been for other similar cases. It was not clear to us which of the absences recorded (101) had been considered and whether any adjustments had been made (including for

JUDGMENT AND REASONS Case No. 2402393/2024