RESERVED JUDGMENT ON LIABILITY

The Judgment of the Tribunal is:

1. The complaints of harassment related to sex and/or gender reassignment are well founded in part and succeed to the extent set out in paragraph 1.1 and

1.2 of this judgment:
1.1 By requiring the Claimants to share a changing room with a biological male trans woman as pleaded in paragraph 23(a) of the Amended Particulars of Claim, the Respondent engaged in unwanted conduct related to sex and gender reassignment which had the effect of violating the dignity of the Claimants and creating for the Claimants a hostile, humiliating and degrading environment.
1.2 By not taking seriously and declining to address the Claimants’ concerns of August and September 2023 and of 04 April 2024, Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others regarding that part of the Transition in the Workplace Policy that afforded biological males access to the female changing room, the Respondent engaged in unwanted conduct related to sex and gender reassignment which had the effect of creating for the Claimants a hostile and intimidating environment.

2. The complaints of indirect sex discrimination are well founded and succeed.

3. The complaints of harassment in so far as they relate to the use of the female changing room by and the conduct of Rose Henderson whilst so using the changing room as pleaded in paragraph 23(b) of the Amended Particulars of Claim, are not well founded and are dismissed.

4. The complaints of harassment in so far as they relate to the conduct of Rose Henderson outside the changing room as pleaded in paragraph 23(e) of the Amended Particulars of Claim are not well founded and are dismissed.

5. The complaints of harassment in so far as they relate to the conduct of the Respondent pleaded in paragraph 23(d), (f), (h, (i), (j) and (k) are not well founded and are dismissed.

6. The complaints of victimisation are not well founded and are dismissed.

7. This judgment is in respect of all claimants with the exception of Joanne Bradbury, whose claim is currently stayed.

REASONS

The Claimants’ claims

1. There are eight claimants in these proceedings. Although their claims were combined to be heard together, each claim is a separate claim and we have considered them as such. Joanne Bradbury’s claim is currently stayed. Therefore, no determination on it has been made by the Tribunal. Therefore, any reference in these reasons to the ‘Claimants’ is a reference to the seven claimants whose cases we heard.

2. The legal claims which have been brought by the claimants are as follows:

2.1 Harassment related to sex and/or gender reassignment (26 Equality Act 2010).
2.2 Victimisation (section 27 Equality Act 2010
2.3 Indirect sex discrimination (section 19 Equality Act 2010).

3. The issues arising out of those claims were agreed and are set out in the Appendix at the end of these reasons. The version appended was amended in the course of the hearing.

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

4. At a preliminary hearing on 02 September 2025, the Claimants were given permission for an expert witness to prepare a report limited to addressing the following questions:

4.1 Are women generally more sensitive than men to being compelled to undress in front of a person of the opposite biological sex?
4.2 Are women more likely than men to suffer fear, distress and/or humiliation if compelled to undress in front of a person of the opposite biological sex? A brief summary of the claims

5. These claims are centrally about the operation by the County Durham and Darlington NHS Foundation Trust of a uniform policy and part of its Transition in the Workplace policy, which permits transgender staff to use the changing room of their choice and which corresponds to their affirmed gender. Under the uniform policy those staff who wear uniforms are not permitted to wear their uniforms to work or to leave work in their uniforms. They must change into and out of uniform at work. To facilitate this, the Trust provides changing facilities. One of its employees, Rose Henderson was permitted to use the female changing room. Rose is a biological male who identifies as female and has the protected characteristic of gender reassignment. The claimants claimed that by permitting Rose to use the changing room, the Trust contravened certain provisions of the Equality Act 2010, in particular, those provisions that prohibit harassment related to a protected characteristic and indirect sex discrimination. In addition, they claimed that certain aspects of Rose Henderson’s conduct inside and outside the changing room infringed section 26 of the Equality Act (the harassment provision). They further claimed that the Trust, through its handling of their complaints and in other respects, contravened section 26 of the Act and section 27 (victimisation provision). The Hearing

6. The cases were listed to be heard over twenty days. In the end, the Tribunal sat for sixteen days before adjourning for deliberations. We were provided with a substantial number of documents (just under 4,500 pages) consisting of six

separate files (‘bundles’) as follows:

6.1 Bundle 1 (Pleadings, Tribunal Orders and Tribunal Correspondence), consisting of 257 pages. [B1/1-257]
6.2 Bundle 2 (Policies, Documents and Correspondence), consisting of 2,174 pages. [B2/1-2174]
6.3 Bundle 3 (Investigation Appendices), consisting of 1,275 pages. [B3/1- 1275]
6.4 Supplemental Bundle (Claimants), consisting of 435 pages. [SB/1-435] Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others
6.5 Media Bundle, consisting of 15 pages.
6.6 Legislation and Guidance Bundle, consisting of 270 pages.

7. For the first four of these bundles, page references in these reasons follows the format: B1/, B2/, B3/, SB/ page number.. The occasional document was added during the hearing (for example, the Respondent’s ‘Policy for Trust Policies’ document) and some bits of correspondence from solicitors but nothing that added significantly to the volume of documents described above.

Witness evidence

8. Sworn evidence was given by twenty-four witnesses. Although Joanne Bradbury’s claim is stayed she had prepared a statement for the purposes of an investigation undertaken by the Respondent (the Resolution Procedure). We were invited to read this statement and to give it such weight as we considered appropriate, when considering the claims of the other seven claimants.

Terms of address

9. There was a high degree of public interest in these proceedings, such are the sensitivities and divisive arguments surrounding questions of gender identity and biological sex in wider society in general. The use of language in this arena can in its own right be seen as controversial. At the outset of the hearing, the legal representatives asked to address the Tribunal on the use of pronouns. They wished to ensure that the Tribunal demonstrated no appearance of bias by the use of any given pronoun when referring to Rose Henderson, a trans woman, whose use of the female changing rooms, is central to the disputes in the case. Having listened to their representations, we established that the Tribunal would refer to Rose by first name and would use the neutral pronoun of ‘they’. Mr Cheetham confirmed that, although Rose went by ‘she’, Rose was content to be referred to as ‘they’ during the proceedings This approach was in accordance with the Equal Treatment Bench book. We considered that such language, particularly with Rose’s prior understanding and agreement was appropriate to address the notion of apparent bias. It was agreed that the Tribunal would not require any party or witness to use any particular pronoun against their wishes, again in keeping with the Equal Treatment Bench book.

10. We wish to record our gratitude to both counsel not just for the quality of their representation and submissions but for the way in which they approached what is on any analysis a contentious subject matter. There were occasional disagreements, for example, as to whether certain lines of cross-examination should be permitted. Both counsel approached the questioning of witnesses with sensitivity. Largely through their skill and cooperation, the evidence was fully heard and tested and the proceedings never became heated.

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

The function of an employment tribunal

11. We begin by providing a brief summary of our function as an employment tribunal. We do so because we are alive to the public interest and division of views that exists in wider society regarding the access by biological male trans women to so- called ‘female spaces’. Many will have views on this and in holding to their views, they will do so irrespective of the legal implications of any given set of facts. That is understandable. People tend not to think in terms of whether any given set of facts is captured by any particular statutory provision. They will form their views, often instantly, based on instinct, or on their own sense of whether something is right or wrong without recourse to any statute. They may describe something as being ‘morally’ right or ‘morally’ wrong because it does or does not ‘feel’ right. The role of an Employment Tribunal, however, is not to form a view on instinct or feeling, or to pronounce on whether a given state of affairs is morally ‘right’ or ‘wrong’. We are conscious that this is a lengthy judgment and that most are unlikely to be interested in anything other than the ‘headline outcome’. No doubt they will draw their own conclusions as to whether that outcome is ‘morally’ right or wrong. Many will read beyond the headline outcome, however. Therefore, we consider it important to first set the scene for those who may be unfamiliar with the work of employment tribunals and their function.

12. Our remit is to adjudicate on complaints in respect of which jurisdiction has been conferred on us by Parliament. We do not have general oversight of employer/worker relations. We are not a public inquiry. We are not here to pass judgment on social mores or preferences. We hear and determine statutory complaints and we do so, or at least we endeavour to do so, judicially. By that, we mean:

12.1 We hear and read evidence.
12.2 Doing the best we can on the evidence we have received, we then make findings of fact
12.3 We then seek to apply the law to those findings of fact.
12.4 We arrive at a reasoned decision based on the application of the law to the findings of fact.

13. We make clear to any reader that we are expressing no wider commentary or views beyond having to adjudicate on the cases before us. We are concerned only with the evidence, the applicable law and how we apply that law to the set of facts in these proceedings.

14. In doing so, we respectfully adopt the terminology of the Supreme Court as set out in paragraphs 6 and 7 of its judgment in For Women Scotland Ltd v Scottish Ministers [2025] I.C.R. 899:

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

“A person who is a biological man, i.e. who was at birth of the male sex, but who has the protected characteristic of gender reassignment is described as a ‘trans woman’. Similarly, a person who is a biological woman, i.e. who was at birth of the female sex, but who has the protected characteristic of gender reassignment is described as a ‘trans man’.”

15. We now turn to our first essential task, which is to set out our findings of fact. One or other or sometimes even both parties are invariably dissatisfied with a tribunal or court’s findings of fact but that is the nature of litigation. Witnesses often give evidence, convinced of the truth of what they are saying. They often profess to recall with clarity the events or words as they describe them. Two witnesses may give wholly irreconcilable versions of the same event. This poses great difficulty for a tribunal of fact. It is no easy task. Judges and panel members possess no special powers that enables them to detect whether someone is lying, if indeed they are lying. The task of fact finding requires an assessment of the ‘reliability’ and/or the ‘credibility’ of a witness’s evidence. Often a close examination of the written contemporaneous documentation assists a tribunal in assessing the reliability of a witness’s oral evidence. Where we have expressed views on the reliability or the credibility of a witness’s evidence, or on part of the evidence, we have done so out of necessity and only for the purposes of determining disputed factual issues. Nothing we say is intended to be – nor should it be taken as - any wider view by us of the reliability or credibility of anyone who gave evidence in this case beyond the matter under consideration. Sometimes, we set out the respective competing positions or we identify the evidential source of contentious evidence before going on to make our findings so that the parties understand the basis for our findings. We would add that in this case all witnesses on both sides gave their evidence with restraint and courtesy.

Findings of fact

The Respondent

16. The respondent Trust provides acute and community health services to a population of approximately 650,000 people across County Durham and Darlington. It has a Board of Directors (‘the Board’) consisting of a Chairman, Chief Executive Officer (‘CEO’), Executive and Non-Executive directors. There is, in addition, a Council of Governors (‘CoG’) the role of which is to hold the Board to account. The Trust employs some 8,500 staff about 80% of which are female. It Operates across a number of sites one of which is Darlington Memorial Hospital (DMH). Others are University Hospital of North Durham (UHND), Bishop Auckland General Hospital (BGH), as well as Community Hospital sites spread across the region.

17. Structurally, the organisation consists of several Clinical Care Groups as well as Corporate Directorates. Each Care Group has a management triumvirate, made up of a Care Group Director (a senior Medic), an Associate Director of Nursing (a

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

senior Nurse) and an Associate Director of Operations (a senior Operational Manager). They are responsible for the day-to-day management, governance and running of their services. One of the corporate directorates is Workforce & Organisation Development (‘Workforce Development’). The current Director of Workforce Development is Andrew Thacker. He reports to the Chief Executive Officer (‘CEO’). Before Mr Thacker took up this role, the position was held by Morven Smith. There was a period when Mr Thacker and Ms Smith were ‘job- sharing’ this role, during the run up to Ms Smith’s retirement. Mr Thacker has three direct reports: Andrew Moore, Alison Nicholson and Tracy Atkinson, each of whom is a ‘Head of Workforce Development’, each with their own portfolios.

18. Andrew Moore, ‘Head of Workforce Experience’ has a portfolio that includes culture and engagement and inclusion. He directly manages a team of three, one of whom is Jillian Bailey, ‘Workforce Experience Manager’. Mr Moore shares an office at DMH with Tracy Atkinson, the ‘Head of Workforce and Organisation Development – Operations’. Ms Atkinson has a portfolio within which she leads three functions. She is ‘Head of Human Resources’ (‘HR’), ‘Head of Resourcing’ and ‘Head of Occupational Health & Wellbeing’. As Head of HR, she has overall responsibility for the HR team. That team consists of, among others, Alison Laidler, an HR Manager and Lesley Smedley, an HR Advisor who reports to Ms Laidler.

19. The events relevant to these proceedings took place at DMH. All of the Claimants are based at DMH and work in the Day Surgery Unit.

Ward 14 and the Day Surgery Unit (‘DSU’)

20. Ward 14 is situated on the first floor of DMH. It is managed by a Band 7 Ward Manager who was, from August 2022, Claire Gregory. Approximately 45 staff work there, split between two sections: elective orthopaedic (consisting of 14 staff) and day surgery (consisting of 31 staff). All of the claimants in these proceedings are band 5 staff nurses, with the exception of Carly Hoy, who is a band 3 Healthcare Assistant. For ease of reference, we shall refer to them compendiously as the ‘DSU nurses’. Throughout the proceedings, the terms ‘ward 14’ and ‘DSU’ were used synonymously by everyone. For present purposes they are one and the same. The DSU is where patients who require planned, or elective, surgery are admitted prior to and after surgery in theatre.

21. In terms of line management structure, between Ms Gregory and the DSU nurses sat two Band 6 nurses, Sister Nicola Harrison and Sister Sarah Naylor. They reported to Ms Gregory. A previous Band 6 nurse, Sister Ali Quinn, also reported to Ms Gregory. She retired in December 2023. Ms Gregory reports to the Matron for Elective and General Surgery, Trauma and Orthopaedic Surgery. From September 2023 that was Sandra Watson. She reports to the Associate Director of Nursing, Helen Coppock.

Theatres

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

22. At DMH, the Theatres nursing staff are managed by Band 7 Theatre Managers. The two B7 Theatre Managers relevant to these proceedings are Tracy Wainwright and Jody Robinson. Ms Wainwright and Ms Robinson also report to a Matron, also (potentially confusingly), called Watson. That is Matron Linda Watson. As is the case with Sandra Watson, Linda Watson reports to Helen Coppock, the Associate Director of Nursing.

23. Aside from the Theatre Managers, the ‘theatres team’ consists of Band 6 nurses, Band 5 staff nurses, Operating Department Practitioners (‘ODPs’) and Health Care Assistants (‘HCAs’). Between them, Ms Wainwright and Ms Robinson are managerially responsible for approximately 137 staff. In addition to those who report to Ms Wainwright and Ms Robinson, the theatres department consists of professional medical practitioners, agency staff and students. As regards the latter, the Trust provides placement opportunities for undergraduates to enable them to undertake degrees or other qualifications relevant to a healthcare or hospital setting.

Interaction between DSU and Theatres

24. Theatre patients are admitted for surgery from a number of sources. The majority are admitted from the DSU. The usual pre-operative procedure is that the patient is admitted to the DSU and is taken to the Surgical Elective Admissions Lounge (‘SEAL’) where they are changed into theatre attire. The patient is then taken to theatre for surgery. After surgery the patient is recovered by an anaesthetic practitioner and is then transferred back to the care of the DSU staff before being discharged from the hospital.

The Claimants

Bethany Hutchison (‘BH’)

25. BH has worked for the Trust at DMH since 2018. She works a regular shift from 7am to 4:30pm on Monday, Wednesday and Thursday.

Karen Danson (‘KD’)

26. KD has worked for the Trust since 2019. Since some time in 2021 (after Covid)

she worked the following shifts:

• 10am – 8pm x 1
• 7am – 5pm x 2
• 7am – 4.30pm x 1 Joanne Bradbury (‘JB’)

27. JB is a Band 5 nurse. She has been employed by the Respondent for some 30 years.

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

Mary Annice Grundy (‘AG’)

28. AG has been employed by the Trust since summer 2021. During the material time she worked 4 shifts a week (but not on Tuesday): 7am – 3pm x 3 7am – 8pm x 1

Lisa Lockey (‘LL’)

29. LL started at DMH at the end of 2020 during Covid. She works two shifts as follows: 7am – 7.30pm x 1 7am – 2.15pm x 1

30. Up until the end of August 2022 LL worked one of those shifts at BAH. From September 2022, both shifts were worked at DMH.

Carly Hoy (‘CH’)

31. CH has worked at DMH since July 2021. From 01 November 2022 up to 14 July 2025 she has worked the following shifts: 09.30am – 8pm x 2 09.30am – 6pm x 1

32. Every other week her third shift finished at 6pm. The shift start times later changed to 10 am on 30 January 2023.

Tracy Hooper (‘TH’)

33. TH started working at DMH in 2002.

Jane Peveller (‘JP’)

34. JP has been employed by the Trust since March 1997. Up until the outbreak of Covid in March 2020 she worked at BAH. She then moved to DMH where she was based initially in the surgical ward before moving to DSU in about October 2020. She works two days a week totalling 15 hours.

Rose Henderson

35. Rose Henderson is employed full time by the Trust as an ODP and is also based at DMH. Rose works in surgery, as part of the theatres team. The role of ODP involves, from time to time, transporting patients to the Intensive Treatment Unit (‘ITU’), to the DSU, to SEAL (pre-surgery) or to the Recovery unit on DSU (post-

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

surgery). In addition to preparing theatres and assisting with operational procedures, an ODP also acts as a link between the surgical team and other parts of the hospital. The changing facilities when Rose first started using them and when the Claimants became aware of this

36. The female changing rooms relevant to these proceedings are situated on the first floor at DMH. They are located next to the male changing rooms. Any reference to ‘the changing room’ is to the female changing room unless stated otherwise. The changing room is used by some 300 females. The use of the changing room by Rose Henderson is at the heart of these proceedings. It was, on first reading, a curious feature of this case that the Claimants and others raise concerns about that only from the summer of 2023 when Rose had been using the changing room since 2019. To make some sense of why that might be, we need to set out a brief timeline.

37. Sometime in 2019, the Respondent’s practice placement educator informed the Theatres Managers, including Tracey Wainwright and Jody Robinson, that a student called Rose Henderson was to start at the hospital, that Rose was transitioning and that Rose would be using the female changing room. This information had been given to the practice placement educator by Teesside University, where Rose was undertaking a degree in Operating Department Practice (‘ODP’). This is part practical, part study and it is a requirement of the course that students spend a significant proportion of time in the operating theatres. The expected pattern is for a student to spend about a month at university followed by about 2 or 3 months at hospital. Given Rose commenced the degree in September 2019, it is more likely than not that they started attending DMH, and using the female changing room, from about November 2019.

38. No-one, whether from Theatres management or HR, had any discussion with Rose about the appropriateness of using the female changing facilities, either during Rose’s time as a student or at any time after Rose became an employee of the Trust. From the outset and throughout, it was simply accepted by management that Rose would use the changing room of Rose’s choice as Rose was transgender.

39. Based on the expected pattern of study/work Rose would have been physically present at DMH for about a month or so in late 2019, up to what would be the students’ normal Christmas break, in mid-December. There was then, most likely a month or so in classroom taking matters to February/March 2020. The first COVID national lockdown then followed in March 2020. Although this did not affect NHS workers in the same way as others, it did affect students. During ‘the COVID period’ as it was referred to (the duration of which was not stated in evidence), Rose spent little time at DMH. The focus during this period was on the academic side of the course. We do not know when Rose returned to DMH after March 2020 other than that it was a considerable period of time, or ‘after COVID’. It is likely that there was some sporadic periods of attendance at the hospital during 2021 as

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

COVID restrictions eased. It is also a factor that university courses run from semester to semester. There was, we infer from this, a break from approximately May/June 2021 to about September 2021. We find that the anticipated regular pattern of about 1 month classroom/2 months’ hospital started to resume from about April 2022, followed by a summer break (at the end of the semester) and resumed again in September 2022. Further, during COVID, DSU staff did not use the female changing room at all for a period of approximately 14 months. They used a room on ward 14. Rose then qualified on 10 October 2022 and commenced employment with the Respondent that month. Rose’s shift times as an employee

40. Rose’s shift times were as follows:

40.1 8am – 6pm (typical pattern)
40.2 1pm – 8pm (late shift)
40.3 8pm – 8am (night shift)

41. As can be seen from the shift times, none of the Claimants had the same start times as Rose Henderson. That was also the case for witnesses called on their behalf, with the exception of Sharon Trevarrow [B3/648] who worked Monday to Thursday 8am – 2pm.

42. Given the above history, the different start and finish times and the differing experiences of individuals (for example, Bethany Hutchison’s absence for much of 2021 and 2022 due to maternity leave and other pregnancy related absences) we were able to understand better why it was that, during the period from September 2019 to approximately the summer of 2023, many staff outside theatres (including those in DSU) were unaware that a trans woman was using the female changing room. It was not, in the end, that surprising to us. Of the Claimants, Bethany Hutchison was the first to learn that Rose was working in Theatres. This was in about January 2023. However, she was unaware at that time that Rose was using the female changing rooms. It was not until about the summer of 2023 that by and large those in the DSU came to learn that a trans woman (who they later came to know as Rose) was using the changing room and this adequately explains why they did not raise concerns earlier.

43. As regards the female changing room at DMH, Rose Henderson was the only trans woman to access it. We heard evidence that there were other trans women employees of the Trust, (for example, see paragraph 41 of Sandra Watson’s witness statement). However, we were not told how many staff. They did not use the DMH female changing room and there was no suggestion or evidence that they accessed or used any other female changing room. We infer from this that either they were not uniform wearers or, if so, that they had alternative arrangements for changing elsewhere.

Trust Policies

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

44. Central to the complaints in these proceedings are two workforce policies operated by the Trust: the ‘Uniform Appearance and Dress Code Policy (‘Uniform policy’) and the ‘Transitioning in the Workplace Policy’ (‘TIW policy’). Given the centrality of the TIW Policy to the issues, we refer to this in more detail below. Before doing so, however, we must briefly set out how the Trust’s policies are developed, approved and reviewed.

45. The Trust has responsibility for producing its own workforce policies. To aid this exercise, it has created a ‘Policy For Policies’ (‘PFP’). This sets out its requirements for, among other things, the development and approval of Trust workforce policies. Any team that is tasked with developing or reviewing a particular policy must refer to the PFP. That team draws on support and guidance from NHS England, NHS Confederation, NHS Employers and other sources where relevant according to the relevant policy that is being developed. The PFP (section 5.3) uses the terminology ‘Document Author’ to describe the subject expert that prepares/drafts the policy and ‘Document Owner’ the latter being identified as senior managers, generally at Associate Director or Executive Director level, to describe the most senior person who has responsibility for the policy.

46. The team responsible for producing and updating workforce policies sits within Workforce Development.

Uniform Policy

47. Although we were not provided with a copy of the Uniform policy, it was common ground that, as regards uniformed staff, it requires employees to attend work in their non-work clothes and to change into uniforms when they arrive at work and to change out of their uniforms before leaving their place of work, including for the purposes of any breaks (see paragraph 8 of the Amended Grounds of Resistance ‘AGOR’). The underlying rationale behind this is, we infer, the infection risk that wearing a uniform outside of the hospital would present. Staff are expected to go straight to a changing room to change into their uniform before going to the ward. They could not just change in any room, again we infer for reasons related to infection risk, but also for reasons of modesty. Only one facility had, in any event been provided for them in which to change.

Transitioning in the Workplace Policy

48. The Trust first looked at developing a TIW policy back in 2016. However, nothing got as far as the review or approval stages of policy creation. Version number 1.0 of the TIW policy was eventually approved by the Trust’s Board of Directors on 19 February 2019. Version 2 was approved on 22 November 2021 We are not aware of any material difference between versions 1 and 2 and no-one in these proceedings suggested that there was any. All references to the TIW policy, therefore, are to version 2.0, unless otherwise stated and we infer that the relevant parts were the same in all material respects.

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

49. Mr Moore’s team is the lead team for the TIW policy. It is also responsible for providing training on Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (‘EDI’). Contrary to the evidence of Mr Moore, the Trust expects someone to have ‘ownership’ of a policy (as can be seen from section 5.3 of the PFP). We find that the ‘owner’ of the TIW Policy was Mr Thacker (and before him Morven Smith) they being the relevant directors of the department within which the policy sits. Ownership in this sense means, as far we can see, the person who has ultimate responsibility for the policy. That is distinct from the ‘author’ of the policy, who is usually the person designated as the ‘subject expert’ on the area covered by the policy.

50. The TIW policy was prepared by a Workforce Experience Officer, Pat Winter, since retired. She is referred to on the Policy Control Sheet [B2/79] as the ‘author’. Mr Moore had been her line manager.

51. The normal process involved in the creation of a Trust policy is as follows: the author researches various pieces of legislation and guidance, prepares policy drafts and then submits their work through a process of review, via the Senior Leadership Team (‘SLT’) to the Trust’s Policy Review Group, the latter being a discussion forum consisting of managers and local union representatives. The draft policy is then taken to the Joint Consultative and Negotiating Committee (‘JCNC’) as an agenda item for approval. The JCNC is jointly chaired by the Director of Workforce and OD and the Staff Side Chair. Once approved by the JCNC it is then submitted to the Operational Performance Assurance Committee (‘OPAC’) for ratification. Finally, it is sent to the Board of Directors for final Board approval prior to publication and implementation.

52. The Trust does not consult with individual members of staff on the creation or development or review of workplace policies (including the TIW policy). That is not unusual and in an organisation of 8,500 staff, it would be wholly unrealistic to expect it to do so. Consultation is – and insofar as concerns the TIW policy was - undertaken with the Respondent’s recognised trade unions on the JCNC. In developing the TIW policy, Mr Moore’s team also consulted with ‘staff network groups.’ These groups were created some years ago by the Workforce Experience team. The groups are: LGBTQ+ Staff Network Group; Disability and Long-Term Conditions Staff Network Group; Unity and Ethnic Diversity Staff Network Group and Faith Staff Network Group. The network groups receive drafts of the policies and are asked to provide feedback as part of the equality impact assessment of the policy.

53. The TIW Policy Control Sheet stipulates an ‘expiration date’ of 30 November 2024. The normal practice of the Trust is that a policy is reviewed every three years, unless something – for example a change or development in the law - prompts an earlier review. Therefore, there is a normal cycle of review or, as it was referred to during these proceedings, a ‘business as usual’ review. The author starts the normal review process some 6 months ahead of the policy expiration date. The TIW policy was at the beginning of its business as usual review from about April

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

or May 2024. This work was undertaken by Jillian Bailey, by now the Workforce Experience Manager who had taken over that responsibility from Ms Winter. Ms Bailey’s role also included EDI. She is the Trust’s subject expert and her name would appear as ‘author’ on version 3.0 of the TIW policy. Ms Bailey had been involved in the initial work of researching a transitioning in the workplace policy back in 2016. However, the TIW policy relevant to these proceedings was one that she ‘inherited’.

The TIW policy

54. The policy begins with an ‘Introduction’ as follows: “County Durham and Darlington NSH Foundation Trust (‘CDDFT’) does not discriminate in any way because of sex, sexual orientation, gender reassignment, gender identity, or gender expression. This policy is designed to create a safe and productive workplace environment for all employees which supports transgender and non-binary employees. The word transgender describes a person whose gender identity, gender expression or behaviour does not conform to the sex they were assigned at birth. Some people will undergo a process of aligning their life and physical identity to match their gender identity, and this is called transitioning. This policy identifies the support offered to staff who are transitioning; and sets out the expectations of behaviour for other members of staff in relation to transitioning and gender identity. Transitioning is a unique process for each individual and may include any number of changes to a person’s life. There is no ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ way to transition. For some this involves medical intervention, such as hormone therapy and surgeries, but not all Trans people want or are able to have this… Transitioning could also involve dressing differently, changing official documents, telling friends and family that you are transitioning, or several other changes. The start of or intent to transition will be different for everyone. It’s about the individual.”

55. Under the heading ‘Purpose and Definition’, the TIW policy says: “For many people their personal sense of being feminine or masculine – their gender identity – matches their birth sex and they do not have any questions over their gender identity. However, some people’s gender identities do not match the gender they were assigned at birth. There is a wide range of ways that people can express gender identity and people should be free to express this in the way they are most comfortable with without facing discrimination.

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

… Many people falsely believe that to transition a person must undergo a medical intervention, such as hormone treatment or surgery, or gain a Gender Recognition Certificate (‘GRC’). It should not be assumed that the goal of every individual’s transition is to change their physiology or legal gender. If a Trans person chooses not to undergo any medical intervention or gain official documentation, they are still entitled to dignity and respect for their chosen gender identity.”

56. Under ‘Duties’ it states: “It is the responsibility of all staff and those working on behalf of the Trust to comply with this policy.”

57. In section 5, under the heading ‘Main Content of Policy’ [B2/84] is a sub-heading called ‘Process.’ This states: “The Trust’s recognition of a transgender person’s identity begins the moment a person informs us they are Trans or intends to transition.”

58. Responsibility for monitoring compliance with the policy is that of the Workforce Experience Team, HR and Occupational Health.

59. Section 8 states that the policy should be used in conjunction with a list of other policies and procedures (14 in all) including the ‘Dignity at Work Policy’ and the ‘Resolution Procedure’. This latter procedure is the Trust’s grievance procedure by another name [page B3/29-47]. The Resolution Procedure envisages two stages: an informal stage, where staff are expected to raise concerns informally with their line manager and a formal stage, which they can progressed to if the informal stage has been exhausted.

60. Section 9 of the TIW Policy contains seven appendices:

60.1 Appendix 1 consists of a flow chart outlining the transition process. This is designed for managing existing members of staff who are considering or have decided to transition (as opposed to staff who join the Trust having already transitioned or are in the process of transitioning).
60.2 Appendix 2 is a guide for managers and employees. We set out the relevant part of Appendix 2 below.
60.3 Appendix 3 consists of ‘Support Plan Template’. This is stated as being a ‘useful starting point to develop a plan’. It sets out questions and points to consider, such as whether others need to know about the Trans person’s plans such as ‘colleagues/friends and people you work with/external partners’ and if so, who will tell them and why. On its face, it clearly envisages the trans employee’s manager having a sensitive discussion with them and preparing a plan of communication of some sort, or at the very least, considering what if anything should be communicated Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others to anyone. It is geared towards managing issues for an existing employee whose outward appearance is to change.
60.4 Appendix 4 consists of ‘Frequently Asked Questions’ or FAQs. One such FAQ is: Q – Will I be able to use the facilities-toilets and changing rooms which match my gender identity? A – Yes, you may also use accessible toilets if you prefer.
60.5 Appendix 5 is headed “Supporting Transgender Colleagues”. It guides employees in a way that is intended to treat transgender colleagues with dignity and respect. It contains a glossary of suggested terminology for people to avoid and suggests correct substitute terminology.
60.6 Appendix 6 is headed ‘Equality Analysis/Impact Assessment. We set out the relevant parts below.
60.7 Appendix 7 is a template ‘Document Approval Request form’. This is to be completed when creating or reviewing the policy. Relevant parts of Appendix 2

61. One of the things that should be discussed between manager and transitioning employee is: “Agreeing the point at which the individual will commence using gender neutral/single sex facilities in their affirmed gender, for example toilets and changing areas. This should occur from the time that the employee wishes this to start as some staff members may prefer to continue to use the same facilities as they used to in the early stages of transition. They are legally allowed to use any toilet facility they prefer and the choice should be theirs.”

(emphasis added) [page B2/91]

62. Under the heading ‘Use of Gender Specific Facilities’ the policy states: “An area of consideration can be the use of gender specific toilets and washroom/shower facilities. CDDFT support a transgender employee’s right to use the toilets and facilities appropriate to their gender from the point at which the individual declares that they are living their life fully in that gender. In some cases, the individual may wish to use a single-occupancy toilet during their transition, but they must not be pressurised to do so, and

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

this should not be a long-term solution. A transgender person should not be expected to use an accessible toilet unless they prefer to do so. We will agree with the employee when they wish to start using the facilities appropriate to their acquired gender and how this should be communicated to colleagues. Any concerns raised by others will be dealt with promptly and sensitively and harassment of the individual will not be tolerated. If others do not wish to share the gender specific facilities, they should use alternative facilities.”

(emphasis added) [page B2/92]

Relevant parts of Appendix 6

63. It is the responsibility of Workforce Development to carry out an equality analysis and impact assessment of the TIW policy. This exercise consists of answering a number of questions under 5 steps. We set out some of those questions and

answers by reference to the various steps:

63.1 Under step 1: ‘what are you hoping to achieve?’ ANS: ‘To provide an overview of Trans inclusion and the gender transitioning process which includes guidance for managers’.
63.2 Under step 2: ‘Who have you consulted with?’ ANS: ‘JCNC, HR Policy Review Group, EDI Strategic Group, CDDFT Staff Network Groups’.
63.3 Under step 3: ‘What is the impact?’ ANS: ‘Ethnicity or Race No differential impact known’ ANS: ‘Sex/Gender No differential impact known – a high percentage of CDDFT workforce identifies as female therefore managers need to be supportive of female to male transitions particularly in historically female dominated professions. Some males that wish to transition to female may be attracted to historically female dominated professions’ ANS: ‘Age No differential impact known – people may choose to transition at any age’. ANS: ‘Disability No differential impact known – Transgender people have a higher likelihood of experiencing mental ill health than the general population and are more likely to attempt suicide. Therefore adopting this framework and providing a supportive environment and structure will help to minimise negative impact on mental wellbeing’. ANS: ‘Religion or belief No differential impact known’ ANS: ‘Sexual orientation. No differential impact known’ ANS: ‘Marriage and Civil Partnership ‘No differential impact known’ ANS: ‘Pregnancy and Maternity No differential impact known’ ANS: ‘Gender Reassignment Outlines support required for a staff member who are proposing to undergo, are currently undergoing or Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others have undergone a process (or part of a process) of gender reassignment. It provides a clear process for managers to follow to support their staff and to ensure that they operate within legal requirements’. ANS: ‘Other socially excluded groups or communities No differential impact known’
63.4 Under step 4: ‘Are any groups affected in a different way to others as a result of the policy? ANS: ‘None’
63.5 Under step 5: ‘How are you going to monitor this policy?’ ANS: ‘The Trust will monitor the application of this framework via the available data annually as part of the EDHR Annual Report and the Equality Deliver Scheme 2 report’.

64. Jillian Bailey led the review of version 2, leading to the drafting and subsequent ratification by OPAC of a version 3.0 on 24 March 2025. That review of version 2.0 came as part of the normal cycle or ‘business as usual’ review. Summer 2023 and the concerns regarding the use of the female changing room by Rose Henderson

65. In 2023 some nurses raised concerns with Sister Ali Quinn regarding the use, by a trans woman, of the changing room at DMH. Bethany Hutchison was one such nurse. We shall set out below the sequence of events as we find them to be. Mrs Hutchison expressed to Sister Quinn that she and others were concerned that a trans employee was changing in the female changing room and that this was a risk to the privacy and safety of female nurses. This was, as Mrs Hutchison described it in oral evidence, ‘an informal discussion about a serious matter’. Mrs Hutchison raised the concern on her own behalf and that of Annice Grundy, who had shared her own concerns with Mrs Hutchison. Lisa Lockey also raised the same concern with Sister Quinn in about September 2023 (not November as stated in the pleadings or list of issues). Lisa Lockey informed Sister Quinn that she did not feel comfortable with a trans woman using the changing room and that she did not think it was right. Sister Quinn told Mrs Lockey that others had also expressed concerns and that the matter was being discussed with management. Tracy Hooper also spoke informally to Sister Quinn at some stage. When that was is unclear; however, we find it most likely to be in August or September. Miss Hooper expressed the same concern as Bethany Hutchison, that a trans woman was using the female changing room and that this presented a risk, or a perceived risk, to safety of the female nurses. She had initially been uneasy about raising any concern as she was concerned she may be seen as bigoted or transphobic and did so only after hearing from other colleagues regarding their views of Rose’s use of the changing room and of the life experiences of some of those nurses (see paragraphs 9 and 10 of Mrs Hooper’s witness statement). None of the concerns was reduced to writing by them or by management. Whatever words were used, the substance of the concern was about the presence in a female only changing room of a biological

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

male/trans woman and the risk that this posed to the female staff and Sister Quinn understood this concern, as is evident from her subsequent feedback, which we shall come to in due course.

66. Doing our best to trace through the sequence of concerns we are able to make the following findings of fact on the timings and who was involved with or aware of these concerns between July and October 2023.

67. As it happened, Mrs Hutchison (nor any of those mentioned in paragraph 65 above) was not the first to raise this concern. The first concern raised came from staff in Theatres. This is clear from the first documented email we have seen regarding this subject, namely the email of Thursday 13 July 2023 from Lesley Smedley of HR to Linda Watson, Matron of Theatres and other managers in theatres [B2/269]. Also copied into this email was Alison Laidler, Ms Smedley’s line manager. We infer that it was the same concern that later came to be raised by those in DSU, namely Rose’s use of the changing room and the perceived risk that this presented to female nurses. The email subject heading is ‘Wednesday’s Sensitive Conversation’. We find that to be a reference to a conversation that took place the previous day between the recipients of the email. Tracy Atkinson had been updated about that sensitive conversation by Ms Smedley by 13 July 2023. Ms Atkinson agreed that Jillian Bailey should have a sensitive discussion and ‘maybe look at awareness to the wider team’ [B2/274]. Ms Smedley advised Theatre Managers to ‘bear with us as we make the arrangements’. The reference to ‘we’ is to HR. Therefore, as of mid-July 2023, management in Theatres and HR personnel (Ms Atkinson, Ms Laidler, Ms Smedley at the very least) were aware that at least one employee from Theatres had raised a concern regarding the use of the female changing room by a trans woman and that this concern was the perceived risk that this presented to female nurses.

68. However, nothing happened in the month between 13 July and 17 August 2023 regarding that concern. On 17 August 2023, Linda Watson emailed Ms Smedley (and the same other recipients) as follows: ‘not sure if we did get any further with this’ [B2/268].

69. By this time another ‘team’, had voiced its concerns, as is apparent from Linda

Watson’s comment:

‘I have been approached from a different team that uses the female changing room’.

70. We find this to be a reference to Sister Quinn’s ‘approach’, following Bethany Hutchison raising her concern. Sister Quinn had taken Mrs Hutchison’s concern (and that of the others who raised it by that date) to Linda Watson who then made HR aware that this was now not just a matter of a concern from Theatres but also from DSU. This was reinforced by Linda Watson’s subsequent email of 22

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

September 2023 (paragraph 76 below) where she expressly refers to an escalation by members of both the Theatres and DSU teams [B2/263].

71. Responding to Linda Watson’s email of 17 August 2023, Lesley Smedley agreed that the matter needed to be addressed. She explained that she had emailed Tracy Atkinson but that Ms Atkinson was not back from leave until the following week [B2/268]. Another month passed without anything being done to address the concerns raised by members of staff in Theatres or DSU. In the meantime, by now about a month or so after she had first raised her concerns, Mrs Hutchison asked Sister Quinn whether anything was going to happen about the matter. Sister Quinn told Mrs Hutchison that she had taken the concerns to senior members of the surgical team, which Ms Hutchison was given to understand consisted of some Band 6 Sisters and a Matron.

72. On 21 September 2023 Lesley Smedley emailed Linda Watson, Jody Robinson

and Tracy Wainwright, asking:

‘has this been sorted? I have flagged with Tracy A but not sure if anything has been done’. [B2/266-267].

73. We find that to be a surprising email from Ms Smedley in the circumstances, especially in light of her own email of 13 July 2023, where she had asked the Theatres managers to ‘bear with us as we make the arrangements’ and her further email of 17 August where she agreed that the matter needed to be addressed. The natural inference to be drawn is that Ms Smedley had expected someone else, other than her, to have ‘sorted’ the matter. She had made more senior people aware of the concerns that had been passed to her by Theatres managers. The expectation was that someone in HR was to do something about the concerns, as she had expressly told the theatres managers to leave it with them. It is plain however that nothing had been done by HR in the ten weeks since concerns were raised at the 12 July 2023 Wednesday meeting regarding the ‘sensitive conversation’, other than to suggest that something be done to look at the ‘awareness’ of staff (paragraph 67 above). That also meant that nothing had been done by operational managers in either Theatres or DSU.

74. On 22 September 2023, at 10.31, Tracy Wainwright responded to Ms Smedley’s

question as follows:

“No this has not been addressed. It was mentioned that it was an education talk but certain staff have their views and these will not change with education/awareness. Staff struggle as this member of staff is not transitioning and a lot of our international staff struggle with her in the female changing room.”

[B2/266]

75. Up until that point in time, the only HR person Ms Wainwright had been in communication with regarding Rose’s use of the changing room had been Lesley Smedley. From this, we infer that Ms Smedley spoke to Ms Wainwright soon after

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

she (Ms Smedley) had raised the matter with Tracy Atkinson on 13 July 2023. Ms Smedley reported to Ms Wainwright that someone from HR would speak to managers about holding an education and awareness talk with the teams. The clear implication of this was precisely that identified by Ms Wainwright, namely that the intention within HR senior management was for someone from HR to ‘educate’ staff by making them aware of the rights of trans employees.

76. HR had not, however, made any arrangements. Therefore, Linda Watson emailed

as follows:

“It would be helpful to have HR input as we don’t wish to put any of the team at detriment, and this has been escalated by both members of the theatre team and the DSU team.” [B2/272]

77. Up until that last email, the recipients/senders of emails on the subject had been the same since the 13 July 2023. Although Tracy Atkinson had been kept informed by Lesley Smedley, she was not directly involved in the email correspondence. On 25 September 2023 Matron Linda Watson included her in the conversation directly: “Can I ask for some availability for a meeting please as this becoming [sic] a wider issue and the teams would like some steer from HR. I see that Lesley and Alison have out of office messages so I will copy Tracy Atkinson in as well.” [B2/272]

78. We infer from this that Matron Linda Watson saw the matter as being urgent and wider than simply Theatres. We also find that the theatre managers were seeking answers from HR. Ms Atkinson then joined in the conversation directly on 25 September 2023 at 19:47 in response to Linda Watson’s email. Ms Atkinson

added Jillian Bailey to the list of recipients. She said:

‘I suggested that we speak with Jillian – did this happen? Jillian are you able to meet with the Theatre team please, I am happy to assist if needed.’ [B2/271]

79. This is a reference to Jillian Bailey, the ‘subject expert’ who had been identified by Ms Atkinson in July 2023 to give the ‘education talk’. Jillian Bailey then joined the email conversation on Tuesday 26 September 2023 [B2/271].

80. On 28 September 2023 Ms Bailey met with the Theatres Managers, Tracy Wainwright, Jody Robinson and Linda Watson via Microsoft teams. There is a difference of account between Tracy Wainwright and Jillian Bailey as to what was said at that meeting. In paragraph 27 of Ms Bailiey’s witness statement she states: ‘they explained to me that Rose had recently stopped taking hormone therapy and had made it quite public with some people that she had decided to have a baby with her partner, that Rose was sounding and looking more masculine as a result of having stopped taking the hormones and that this had led to some staff complaining that they felt uncomfortable’. Ms Wainwright said that she did not say

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

these things to Ms Bailey as statements of fact. Rather, she was, she said, describing what she understood others to have been saying about Rose.

81. It is, we find a bit of both. As regards the reference to cessation of hormone treatment and plans to have a baby, we find that Ms Wainwright was indeed reporting what others had been saying. These ‘rumours’ as they were described had been drawn to her attention but by whom she did not say. This was also the case with regards to comments about Rose not transitioning. Although her email of 22 September 2023 [B2/257] reads as if she is giving her own personal observations on that subject, we find that was no more than a poorly expressed email, as she alludes to in paragraph 12 of her witness statement. Ms Wainwright was not asserting that Rose was not transitioning. She was trying to express what she understood others had been saying from information that had come to her attention, which she regarded as ‘general chatter’, ‘rumblings’, ‘rumours’ and ‘intelligence’. We find that Ms Wainwright almost certainly knew who it was, within Theatres, who had expressed concerns about Rose planning to have a baby with their female partner and that Rose had stopped taking hormones. However, she had never personally spoken to Rose about these things. Therefore, she could not say for sure if that was the case.

82. Despite these things having been drawn to her attention through what she described as ‘intelligence’, Ms Wainwright did not consider it appropriate to have any conversation with Rose about the concerns for a number of reasons: firstly, because of the clear terms of the TIW policy; secondly, because Rose had worked in Ms Wainwright’s team and had used the changing room for years and Ms Wainwright did not consider Rose to be a threat to anyone; thirdly, because, we find, Ms Wainwright and Ms Robinson were dismissive of the concerns based on their knowledge of Rose; and fourthly, because she believed that Rose had the right to use the changing room and that even to have the conversation may amount to discrimination against Rose.

83. Ms Bailey gave evidence in a considered, measured and reflective way. However, we were satisfied that she had partly got the ‘wrong end of the stick’ in what she has set out in paragraph 27 of her witness statement. Although it was mentioned by Ms Wainwright and Ms Robinson at that meeting that Rose had stopped taking hormones and had made it public that they were trying for a baby, neither Ms Wainwright nor Ms Robinson were stating these things from any personal knowledge of their own because neither of them had spoken to Rose about these personal issues. Neither had Rose volunteered this information to them personally.

84. However, as regards the references in paragraph 27 of Ms Bailey’s witness statement to Rose’s physical appearance, we find that the description given to her was indeed that of Ms Wainwright’s and Ms Robinson’s own personal observations of Rose. They explained to Ms Bailey that Rose had recently appeared and sounded more masculine. It is more likely than not that Ms Wainwright mentioned this during the discussion about the ‘rumours’ regarding cessation of hormone treatment – i.e. Ms Wainwright and Ms Robinson, we infer, explained to Ms Bailey

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

that if those rumours were true this might explain Rose’s recent appearance, which they described to Ms Bailey as Rose sometimes attending work with visible stubble, referring to one occasion where Rose had not shaved for several days without hiding with make-up. Ms Wainwright also explained to Ms Bailey that there were international/overseas staff who were using the changing rooms. All three managers felt and expressed to Ms Bailey that these nurses may have concerns about Rose’s use of the changing room. Ms Wainwright had personal knowledge of the discomfort felt by ‘international nurses’ whilst using the changing room. She had personally noticed that international staff ‘go into the shower cubicles because they don’t like to get changed with anybody’. From this noted reticence to changing in front of other biological women, we are satisfied that Ms Wainwright deduced that women from a ‘non-western country/culture’ (as ‘international nurses’ were described to us) would have even greater concerns about changing in the same space as a biological male. It is more likely than not and we so find that Ms Wainwright noticed this reticence of ‘international nurses’ more so when Rose was present in the changing room.

85. Despite her own observations regarding international nurses and despite being aware indirectly of the concerns of other staff, Ms Wainwright never asked to speak to any of the nurses in Theatres (or in DSU for that matter), whether the international nurses or anyone else, about their concerns. In keeping with the TIW policy, Ms Wainwright believed that anyone who was uncomfortable with the arrangement could change somewhere else. That could only realistically mean changing in the toilet or in a shower cubicle.

86. Ms Bailey was not told at this meeting of 28 September 2023 that staff in DSU had raised concerns, as opposed to staff in Theatres. Therefore, she did not meet with any manager from DSU. She met only the Theatres Managers and she subsequently emailed only the Theatres team. However, as already set out above, Linda Watson had mentioned in the string of emails which had been forwarded to Ms Bailey by Ms Atkinson prior to that meeting, that concerns had also been raised by the DSU team. Ms Bailey had not taken that in and proceeded wrongly on the basis that the concerns were within the Theatres team only. Although Ms Bailey ought to have known this from the emails, someone, either Theatres managers or Ms Smedley or Ms Atkinson, could have but did not make it clear.

87. No one from HR, considered it necessary or important to speak to the staff who raised the concerns directly at the time, as opposed to speaking only to the theatres managers. Neither Ms Smedley nor Ms Laidler, nor Ms Atkinson had asked who has raised the concerns. They were content to proceed simply on the basis that unnamed nurses had raised concerns without attempting to get any understanding of why they might object to Rose’s use of the changing room. We are of course aware of the distinction between the functions of HR and operational management. However, sometimes a concern cannot be addressed locally by operational management in a specific part of the organisation and must be addressed at the relevant directorate level, which in this case was HR, or more properly Workforce and Organisational Development. This was just such a concern because it was

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

about the appropriateness of a specific part of the Trust wide TIW policy. That much was obvious. It was also why Theatres Managers had turned to HR for answers. They knew what the policy said on giving Rose Henderson the choice and that Rose had exercised that choice.

88. No-one from HR, including Ms Bailey, visited the changing room. This meant that Ms Bailey was giving advice to Theatres managers based only on a description of that room given to her by them. This inevitably increases the risk of misunderstanding. One such misunderstanding that arose is evident from paragraph 32 of Ms Bailey’s witness statement. Ms Bailey understood the changing room to contain cubicles for changing – as opposed to shower or toilet cubicles which might be utilised for changing if necessary. That was not the case. There were, in fact, no changing cubicles in the changing room. Although there were two shower cubicles (with curtains) and three toilet cubicles (with lockable doors), these were not changing cubicles. The normal practice and expectation – and by nature of the layout of the room – was that staff would get changed into and out of their uniform in the open, in front of each other. As already observed, not all nurses were comfortable with changing in the open, even in front of other women and some resorted to changing in the ladies’ toilet. They did so in order to preserve their own propriety or modesty.

89. At the meeting of 28 September 2023, Ms Bailey advised the Theatres Managers to talk to Rose about the fact that some of Rose’s colleagues had concerns, of the sort that had been drawn to Ms Wainwright’s attention. Ms Bailey did not think it right that concerns had been raised of which Rose was unaware. She thought and advised that the best solution was to try to work with Rose on any solution. She raised the possibility that Rose might be asked if they were willing to change elsewhere. However, this suggestion was met with resistance by the theatres managers. None of the three managers present would countenance this. They were insistent that they should not make Rose aware of the concerns or address them directly with Rose at all. As Linda Watson later described it, they were unhappy with the advice [B3/968]. They expressed the view that Rose should be supported and must not be treated differently. They felt that if Rose was asked to change elsewhere this would be wrong and discriminatory.

90. Ms Wainwright was comfortable with Rose using the changing room. She personally had no concern. She believed that those who wished Rose to use alternative facilities were inflexible in their views. She was, we find, right about that. However, she was equally inflexible in her view that Rose must not be asked even to consider changing elsewhere. As we have set out above, she had understood that HR were going to arrange for an ‘education talk’ for staff. She understood this to be a talk to raise awareness on the rights of trans people and the need for transwomen to be able to share the changing room with female nurses – something which aligned with Ms Wainwright’s view. She and the other Theatres managers believed that such a talk would not change the views of those staff who objected to Rose using the changing room. Therefore, they were strongly of the view that there should be no dialogue with Rose about the matter and that those who

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

objected to Rose’s presence in the changing room should change elsewhere. It will be seen, in due course, that Ms Wainwright’s view that others should be asked to use alternative facilities over Rose’s choice to use the changing room, was shared throughout HR up to the highest level. Rose’s choice was prioritised over the objections of others.

91. Having met with resistance about speaking to Rose, Ms Bailey changed her advice to Theatres managers after the meeting. She gave the matter further thought and emailed the Theatres managers at 11:25am that same day (28 September 2023). We set that email out in full (emphasis added): “I have had a think about this since we spoke and reflected on it from an objective stand point. Essentially when weighing up the risks in this situation on one hand we have risking upsetting Rose which potentially could be illegal discrimination whereas the other staff that have complained the risk is for them feeling uncomfortable. Therefore, on this basis I would recommend going back to the people that have complained and explaining that as an organisation we understand they may feel uncomfortable with the situation however we respect Rose’s right to identify as female and her choice to use the facilities that match her gender. You may wish to point out what other options are open to them to use such as the cubicles if they feel they want to have more privacy. I think in other areas that I have been aware of in this organisation this has not been an issue as the individual transitioning has been much more conscious of their own privacy when getting changed and the request has come from them to put in place other provisions, which has made this a lot more straight forward. As agreed, I have contacted a few other people I know if they have come across a similar issue as you are having, where the individual that has transitioned is quite happy in a communal area themselves and will let you know if I hear of any other suggestions but I suspect they will adopt an equally cautions approach of keeping on the right side of the law rather than trying to satisfy the complaining staff.”

[B2/275-276]

92. Matron Linda Watson replied, thanking Ms Bailey for her support. In her email to Ms Bailey of 28 September 2023, she said: “I recognise that there are concerns regarding discrimination and protected characteristics from a legal point of view and support a cautious approach from that perspective. I can and will have a conversation with staff who have raised concerns if they are identified to me, alongside the Theatre Managers, however I also acknowledge that all staff have a right to raise concerns and I have an obligation to support both the individual and the staff who may feel uncomfortable – the ‘complaining staff’ – as they will also feel they have a right to have their privacy and

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

dignity respected. I can suggest alternatives such as using cubicles or another area of the changing room where appropriate. It is a minefield as we discussed, and we acknowledge that this is difficult for all involved, but as a Matron I have to ensure that all staff feel listened to and that I act on their concerns. As a team we recognise that these challenges will become more prevalent, and will be more accepted, unfortunately as we can see, we are not in that position at the moment. I would very much appreciate if you do find that other organisations have any further suggestions regarding this matter that you pass these on for consideration.“ [B2/275]

93. We do not know whether the identity of those ‘complaining staff’ within theatres was ever given to Linda Watson and if so, what if any discussions she had with the Theatres’ staff following this email. Nothing of that sort has been documented anywhere. We do know that Matron Watson did not speak to any of the complaining members of staff from DSU. Sister Quinn informed Mrs Hutchison that management had taken on board the points she and others had raised regarding safety and risk but they had to accept the situation because of the inclusiveness of the NHS. Ms Bailey had not advised anyone in DSU directly and Sister Quinn had not been present at the 28 September meeting nor copied into the email. We infer that it was Linda Watson who fed back to Ali Quinn the advice from Ms Bailey and that the gist of the feedback as set out in paragraph 9 of Ms Hutchison’s witness statement is accurate. It is more likely than not that this feedback from Sister Ali Quinn was given not in August but shortly after the advice of Jillian Bailey contained in the email of 28 September 2023. Mrs Hutchison has simply got her timings slightly wrong in paragraph 9 of her witness statement.

94. Therefore, as of the end of September 2023, the response to the concerns raised by Bethany Hutchison and others was in essence that they had to accept the fact that a trans woman was using the female changing room because of NHS inclusiveness. This feedback was given without anyone in a Band 7 management role or anyone in HR asking to speak to the individuals or without any review of the potential impact of the TIW policy on female nurses. Upon giving the feedback Sister Quinn did not inform Mrs Hutchison or anyone else that they could raise the matter more formally if they were not satisfied with this.

October 2023 to April 2024

95. The feedback from Sister Quinn to Bethany Hutchison was the last word on the matter from management up to April 2024. As articulated above, the Trust’s Resolution Procedure makes provision for an employee to take a concern further, if it has not been informally resolved to their satisfaction. By raising their concerns with Sister Quinn, they (Mrs Hutchison, Mrs Lockey, Mrs Hooper and Mrs Grundy) were in substance – albeit unwittingly – doing what was required under stage one of the Trust’s Resolution Procedure, albeit they had not completed any of the usual forms the Resolution Procedure provides for when raising a concern. However, none of those mentioned above had been involved in raising a grievance before.

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

They had not consulted the Trust’s Resolution Procedure and were not aware of its terms. As already set out, Sister Quinn did not explain to anyone that they could take the matter further under the Trust Resolution Procedure or any other procedure.

96. However, the concerns remained. Not unnaturally, DSU staff spoke and shared their views and concerns with each other. It was not until October or November 2023 for example, that Mrs Hutchison came to learn from Lisa Lockey that she too had raised the same issue with Sister Quinn and that Mrs Lockey told her that the issue had been raised with management. They came to learn that others had the same concerns. Mrs Hutchison had also been discussing the situation at home with her husband and her father. Eventually, with their support and encouragement, she came to the view that she and others should make a formal written complaint.

97. It was in February 2024 when the concerns regarding Rose’s use of the changing room first came to the attention of the claimants’ line manager, Claire Gregory. It is surprising that it took this long for her to learn of this and it is, we find, explained by the fact that Ms Gregory is not permanently present on the ward and that (unlike the Theatres managers) she did not use the changing room. Further, Ms Gregory had never met or seen Rose and Sister Quinn had for whatever reason never made her aware of the concerns and we note that she had retired by December 2023. In any event, on hearing of the concern, Ms Gregory immediately considered it to be an issue for HR. Unbeknown to her, HR had, as we have seen, been made aware of concerns from some Theatres staff back in July 2023 and from some DSU staff in August 2023, albeit no individual names had ever been given to them.

98. Ms Gregory contacted Lesley Smedley of HR and told her that some DSU nurses were concerned about a biological male, trans woman changing in the female changing room. Ms Smedley advised Ms Gregory to find out what the concerns were, to take notes and then come back to HR. Ms Gregory had spoken to Ms Smedley by 19 February 2024 [see page 290 witness bundle, time stamp 02:57]. As we have seen, Ms Smedley had, of course, been aware of the concerns that had been raised back in the summer/Autumn 2023 from both theatres and DSU. Therefore, this cannot have come as any surprise to her, even if she had thought – wrongly – that the concerns might have gone away.

99. Ms Gregory met with the nurses in DSU on 19 February 2024. The purpose of the meeting was to enable her to discuss the concerns with the DSU staff and to document them in an email to Ms Smedley. The meeting was covertly recorded by Mrs Hutchison. Whether she was right or wrong to do so, Mrs Hutchison wanted to have an accurate record of what the concerns were. She was by this time intent on taking legal advice from the Christian Legal Centre, something that had been suggested to her by her family and she wanted a recording for her own purposes. She did not tell anyone else she was recording the discussion. We were invited to listen to the recording and we did so carefully more than once. A transcript was prepared and attached as an exhibit to Mrs Hutchison’s statement and was at

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

pages 287 – 305 of the witness bundle. The transcript is by and large a faithful reproduction of the recording. Ten speakers are identified by name as speaking and others whose names were not given are identified as ‘speaker’ or ‘multiple’.

100. The speakers, including some of the claimants in this case, spoke of their concerns about having to undress down to their underwear in the presence of Rose, who is described as being male and masculine in appearance. Lisa Lockey refers to taking her top off and that she saw Rose looking at her. One speaker described a busy room full of ‘bums and boobs’ and feeling uncomfortable because of Rose being there and seeing them. Some speak of Rose telling people about trying to get their girlfriend pregnant. In an effort to capture the concerns in a way that could be sent to Lesley Smedley, Claire Gregory said: “We have to be saying that we are females, we have got a voice, we have got the right as well to be able to get changed safely, confidently and comfortably” [page 298, Claire Gregory, time 13:00].

101. Mrs Hutchison added that they should also be saying that the Trust has an obligation to protect their dignity and safety. Mrs Hutchison added: “The discussion is as well, where do we draw the line? Is it that people who are cosmetically changed are all right. Because actually I would feel more comfortable if somebody was cosmetically … and chemically” [page 298, Bethany Hutchison, time 13:55].

102. This latter comment by Mrs Hutchison (which from a listening of the recording we find received a chorus of agreement by many present) reflects what we find to be the main concern for the DSU nurses, that a biological male, one believed to be in a sexually functional relationship with a female partner was permitted to change clothes alongside them in a female only changing room. It was this perception of ‘maleness’ of Rose and the concern that Rose was permitted to be in a room with them whilst in partial undress that was at the heart of their concerns and that made them feel unsafe.

103. Ms Gregory had mentioned to her direct manager, Sandra Watson that she was meeting with the nurses and why. Sandra Watson asked to be copied in on Ms Gregory’s email to Lesley Smedley. On 19 February 2023, at 16:57, Ms Gregory emailed Ms Smedley [B2/277-278]. We set out the key parts of that email below:

“Good afternoon Leslie

I write in relation to several upset members of my team within Day Surgery at DMH. They have informed me that there is a member of staff within theatres who refers to themselves as being female but is physically a male and living a male life.

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

I have had a debrief meeting this morning with my team and they have made me aware of some of their concerns. …... This current situation poses a huge risk to our female employees and they are feeling undermined that their Trust are not looking after their interests or that of our LGBT community. We feel that the Trust should provide suitable changing facilities for those who are going through transition and it is not that we female colleagues need educating on the topic. The Trust do state that they protect their staff and provide them with safe comfortable changing facilities. This is not occurring as some of my staff are actually afraid to get changed in the female changing room as they are made to feel uncomfortable. The Trust also state that they will adhere to religious and cultural beliefs. One of my nurses today has explained how she was late off her shift as she wouldn't get changed while this member of staff was in the female change. None of my team are against this once the gender transition is complete but at present the team are feeling very deflated and unsupported. We are aware that the world is evolving and our societies are changing no one disputes this …”

104. Ms Gregory emailed Ms Smedley again on 22 February 2024. She attached a link to a website, ‘Fair play for women’ [B2/283]. (the same email was reproduced at B3/88). She added: “… staff are upset that they have not been made aware of the likelihood of this happening in the female change and feel the staff member is being let down by not having suitable changing facilities.”

105. The reference to the ‘staff member’ is a reference to Rose Henderson.

106. Ms Smedley forwarded Ms Gregory’s emails to her line manager Alison Laidler. She, in turn, emailed Sue Williams (HR Compliance Officer) and Gordon Brockbank on 22 February 2024, referring to a discussion that was to take place later that afternoon. Ms Laidler noted that ‘Lesley’ (Smedley) had spoken with the transitioning member of staff’s manager and there ‘may be some exaggeration going on’ [B2/282]. The reference to ‘some exaggeration going on’ is a reference to the content of the email from Ms Gregory (summarised in paragraph 103 above). However, no one from HR or theatres spoke to or fed back to Ms Gregory regarding any suspicion of exaggeration nor had anyone investigated anything before expressing that view.

107. On the same day, 22 February 2024 [B2/289-290], Lesley Smedley emailed Jillian Bailey, Tracy Atkinson, Alison Laidler and Andrew Moore. The subject header was ‘re: Jillian Bailey/Tracy Wainwright meeting today’. Ms Smedley also attached the email from Jillian Bailey dated 28 September 2023 containing the advice Ms Bailey had given to Theatres back then [B2/290-291].

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

108. Ms Smedley said in her email of 22 February: “I have attached one of the emails I have received. I think there is some exaggeration on them stating rose is parading about in their underwear”.

109. It was Tracy Wainwright who first used this phrase ‘parading about’ when discussing with Ms Smedley her understanding of the concerns raised by Ms Gregory on behalf of DSU nurses. From what Ms Smedley had described, she interpreted the allegation to be that Rose had been parading about in the changing room in underwear. On 15 January 2025, Sue Williams emailed Ms Wainwright as follows: ‘during the interview with Lesley Smedley she informed us that you had reported that Rose was parading around in her boxers – can you confirm where you got this from/who told you this?” [B3/908]. This prompted a response from Ms Wainwright who responded: “I certainly did not say this. I get changed near to Rose and she does not parade in her boxer shorts.” [B3/907]. The reference to ‘parading’ therefore emerged from the discussion between Ms Smedley and Ms Wainwright. By the time it reached Ms Newton, it had been incorrectly described as being an assertion, rather than a denial, by Ms Wainwright.

110. The key point is that Ms Smedley’s view that the concerns were possibly being exaggerated was based solely on Tracy Wainwright’s response and was expressed without going any further to establish any facts.

111. Ms Smedley asked Ms Bailey whether she had any suggestions. Ms Bailey replied on 27 February 2024 [B3/90-91] giving advice and embedding links to various sites including:

- the ‘Fair Play for Women website’ (this came from the link sent by Ms Gregory as per paragraph 104 above)
- the Equalities and Human Rights Commission (‘EHRC’) non-statutory guidance of April 2022
- an article from Personnel Today
- a document from the NHS Confederation called ‘Leading for all supporting trans non-binary healthcare staff September 2023’

112. Ms Bailey advised that a thoughtful approach to finding a balanced resolution was needed; that ideally, a long-term solution should involve the creation of gender-neutral, fully enclosed cubicle changing facilities for universal use across all changing areas. She suggested some interim measures to be considered:

- Open dialogue with parties to discuss appropriate and acceptable solutions.
- Access practical enhancements to privacy within the existing changing facilities, such as installing additional partitions or cubicles.
- Explore alternative changing arrangements without compromising the rights of any individual, including flexible schedules, staggered start/finish times, or alternative facilities where feasible. Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

113. The Fair Play for Women link contained an article headed ‘Advice to service providers about female-only changing rooms’. It was not advice to employers. However, we were taken to it in evidence as it was an article read by Ms Bailey [see the Legislation and Guidance Bundle, pages 81-104]. Among other things, the article stated: “This guidance highlights the relevant sections in UK law to help service providers who offer changing room facilities to their customers. There is little in the way of established case law for business to rely on, so instead this guide sets out the legal framework with reference to the approved legal text of the Equality Act 2010. … We also highlight where relevant any guidance published by the EHRC in the form of statutory code. Statutory code is not an authoritative statement of the law; only the tribunals and the courts can provide such authority. What does female only mean? Under UK law there are 2 sexes: male and female. ‘Female-only’ means restricting the service to members of the female sex only and excluding members of the male sex. Your legal sex class is what’s written on your birth certificate.”

114. The article went on to make a number of observations about why it is not unlawful to discriminate against biological male trans women by excluding them from a female-only changing room. It referred to there being provision in the Equality Act 2010 within Schedule 3, Part 7 of that Act which provides that a person does not contravene section 29 of Part 3 of the Act (which deals with services and public functions) by providing a service only to persons of one sex if certain conditions (those contained in paragraph 27 of schedule 3, para 7) are satisfied and where the limited provision is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.

115. The article also addressed any concerns some might have about potential discrimination against those with the protected characteristic of gender reassignment. It referred to Part 7, section 28 of the Act (it really means paragraph 28 of Part 7 of Schedule 3) which it stated sets out a lawful exception to gender reassignment discrimination provided the conditions in ‘section’ 28(2) apply and is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.

116. The article set out what is meant by ‘objective justification’ relating this to the use of female-only changing rooms. It did so by reference to the EHRC code. It gave examples of what it referred to as good reasons (or legitimate aims) why some women might want and need female-only changing rooms. The article concluded that:

- “Female-only changing rooms are lawful and achieves the legitimate aim of providing the safety and privacy that women want and need when they are in a state of undress. Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others
- Special exceptions exist in the Equality Act to allow service providers to lawfully exclude people born male from female-only spaces.
- All males can be lawfully excluded, even members of the male sex who self- identify as women and even males who have legally transitioned to female (meaning those in possession of a GRC)
- To minimise the impact on transgender customers you can provide a mixed- sex changing area in addition to your female-only changing area.
- By not providing a female-only changing area may be at risk of litigation.”

117. Ms Bailey read this article before replying to Lesley Smedley on 27 February 2024 [B3/90-91]. She advised that:

118. “while the article presents a perspective emphasising the importance of same-sex provisions under the Equality Act, asserting that same-sex excludes trans women based on their legal biological sex, it is crucial to acknowledge the contrasting wording that transgender individuals have the right not to face discrimination based on their gender reassignment under the same Act and should be given access to gender appropriate facilities. The Act recognises both rights, creating a nuanced legal landscape” [B3/90].

119. Ms Bailey confirmed in her oral evidence to the Tribunal that her belief that the Equality Act meant that a transgender employee should be given access to gender appropriate facilities was based on no particular provision of the Equality Act. She had in mind only the general prohibition of discrimination against a person because of gender reassignment. She believed this to be confirmed by other guidance that differed to that provided by ‘Fair play for women’, which she described in her email to Ms Smedley as a ‘gender critical website’. That is a correct description, we find. However, this does not diminish what is said in the article. We find that Ms Bailey did not accord significance to the Fair play for women article because it was a gender critical site. This highlights something that was evident to this tribunal (and it surfaced when Professor Pheonix came to give evidence) namely that when someone expresses a view either way on the use by trans women of what might be seen as traditional ‘female spaces’, they come to be viewed as either being ‘against trans rights’ or ‘for trans rights’. This chimes with the evidence of Mrs Hooper, who felt constrained in expressing her concerns for fear of being seen as ‘transphobic’. A deeper analysis of the issue was overlooked by the reduction of the article as being from a gender critical website.

120. Ms Bailey also obtained from South Tyneside and Sunderland NHS Foundation Trust a copy of its policy ‘Transitioning at work and gender diversity policy’ [B2/212-237] where she noted that much of it was similar to the Respondent’s TIW policy. In the South Tyneside policy, at section 10.11 it stated:

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

“Trans colleagues are entitled to use the facilities of their affirmed gender identity. Gender-neutral changing spaces should be provided where possible. In the absence of gender neutral changing spaces, Trans and Non-Binary staff members may use the facilities they feel most comfortable using.”

121. Ms Bailey spoke to someone at the South Tyneside Trust who told her that its policy had been through their solicitors who confirmed that it was in line with current legislation and guidance. At the time Ms Bailey was not aware of the content of the Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992. She became aware of these at some point in time. It is more likely than not that this was after proceedings in this case had commenced. She was not alone. Mr Thacker did not become aware of them until March 2025. When he read them, he understood two things: firstly, that they provided for single sex changing facilities for men and women and secondly that they were binding on the Trust as an employer’s obligations in the workplace. The Trust’s TIW policy had been drafted and reviewed in ignorance of these Regulations.

Ward meeting 05 March 2024

122. During a ward meeting on 05 March 2024, staff asked Ms Gregory whether there had been any response to their concerns regarding the use of the changing room by Rose. Ms Gregory had received no update. She emailed Ms Smedley again after that meeting [B2/287]. Ms Gregory asked whether staff could attend a meeting so that they may constructively put their points across and be advised by HR directly rather than through her (Ms Gregory). Ms Smedley replied that day to say they were escalating it and would get back to her. However, Ms Gregory received no further update in March. This was reminiscent of the delay experienced by Linda Watson back in July 2023 when Ms Smedley had asked managers to bear with them.

123. A number of nurses, including the claimants, had by now come to believe that the lack of response from management or HR demonstrated a lack of any sense of urgency on the Trust’s behalf. They felt that this reflected a lack of concern for them and that they were not being listened to or taken seriously. Among them was Mrs Hutchison. As stated above, she had been discussing the matter at home for some time. On her father’s suggestion, she and some of the other nurses approached Christian Concern/ Christian Legal Centre for advice and support. They could have approached their trade union but they chose not to. They believed that, in Christian Concern, they would find a willing supporter with legal support. Mrs Hutchison approached them for advice some time between 19 February 2024 and 20 March 2024. Letter of complaint dated 27 March 2024 (sent on 04 April 2024)

124. Having consulted with Christian Concern, a letter dated 27 March 2024 was drafted by a solicitor, Mr Stroilov, who went on to represent the Claimants in this litigation. The letter is at page B3/79-82. It was signed by 26 nurses, making up

Case Number: 2501192/2024 & others

just over half the nurses in the DSU. It refers, among other things, that Rose had ‘made no secret’ of trying to have a baby with Rose’s female partner. Most, if not all of the Claimants were questioned by Mr Cheetham about this. He put to them that this was mere rumour and that they had no direct knowledge of this. The Claimants accepted that they had no direct knowledge and that it was something that had spread across the department. They believed that the source came from nurses in theatres who knew Rose and to whom Rose had spoken about it. They believed it to be true. Rightly or wrongly, it emphasised to them Rose’s ‘masculinity’ and represented to them that the person sharing the changing room was a sexually active, functioning biological male. They took it as ‘common knowledge’.

125. Counsel asked for a ruling as to whether Mr Fetto should be permitted to question Rose on whether there was truth to these rumours, hitherto expressed as ‘common knowledge’. Mr Cheetham considered that any questioning would be unnecessarily intrusive. Mr Fetto, submitted that there was at least implied criticism of the Claimants for raising it without having direct knowledge and that it was, in any event, relevant to the question of impact on the harassment case, that it would form part of the analysis as to whether it was reasonable for Rose’s use of the changing room to have the effect contended for by the Claimants. We gave Mr Fetto permission with the caveat that we expected him to approach the matter sensitively. Mr Fetto did just that. His questions were limited only to whether Rose had told people about the matter and he did so in a delicate and proper manner. Rose confirmed that they had indeed talked to colleagues in Theatres about their intention to start a family later in life. The original source of the information was, therefore, Rose. That information then travelled through Theatres and onto DSU.

126. The letter dated 27 March 2024 was not in fact sent until 04 April 2024 [B2/323]. The letter was sometimes referred to in the proceedings as ‘the 04 April 2024 letter’. They are one and the same. Ms Atkinson, Mr Moore and Mr Thacker confirmed in their evidence that, upon reading the letter they understood it to consist of two related concerns: firstly, the very use of the female changing room by Rose Henderson, a biological male, trans woman and secondly, the alleged behaviour of Rose in the course of using the changing room. Mr Moore understood the concerns of the nurses around the policy itself. Although he and Ms Atkinson later said that it was only on 20 May 2024 that they first understood there to be behavioural concerns as well, in oral evidence to the Tribunal they acknowledged that the letter also contained allegations about personal behaviour, in addition to a concern about the use of the room.