JUDGMENT

UPON HEARING from Counsel for the Claimant and Counsel for the Respondent UPON considering the evidence AND for the reasons set out below

IT IS THE TRIBUNAL’S JUDGMENT THAT

1. The following claims that respondent subjected the claimant to the detriments as identified below because she made one or more protected disclosures are presented out of time. Because it is accepted it was reasonably practicable to present them in time, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider them and they are dismissed.

1.1 Subjected the claimant to intense pressure to move from the ward because she made one or more protected disclosures;
1.2 Subjected the claimant to increased hostility by staff and/or patients, and in particular from Dr Naik and others who had been instigated to do so by Dr Naik for making protected disclosures;
1.3 Subjected the claimant to malicious and unfounded allegations namely
1.3.1 a comment that she had said that “nurses lowered their standards”;
1.3.2 an allegation the claimant had “shouted” at bed management;
1.3.3 an allegation that the claimant had used clinical notes to criticise other professionals; and
1.3.4 an allegation that the S1 entries for Patient 3 had been used to criticise other professionals. because she made protected disclosures;
1.4 The instigation of a disciplinary process because she made protected disclosures;
1.5 Being relocated from the Bradgate Unit because she made protected disclosures;
1.6 The claimant’s ongoing suspension from on-call work, including once the investigation processes had concluded because she made protected disclosures;
1.7 A delay in the resolution of the whistleblowing complaints;
1.8 Inadequate resolution of the whistleblowing complaints including the failure to consult with the claimant during this process and to provide an unredacted whistleblowing report;
1.9 Reaching irrational conclusions in the disciplinary process; and
1.10 The claimant’s grievance and complaint regarding bullying were not taken seriously and witnesses who could corroborate her complaint were not questioned.

2. The following claims that the respondent subjected the claimant to the detriments as identified below because she made one or more protected disclosures are dismissed.

2.1 Removal of the claimant’s teaching responsibilities;
2.2 Failure to respond to Dr Benaris’s communications seeking a sustainable return to on-call work and to implement a plan for a return to the on-call rota.

3. The claimant’s claim that she was constructively unfairly dismissed for making a protected disclosure fails and is dismissed; and

4. The claimant claims that she was constructively unfairly dismissed fails and is dismissed.

REASONS

Introduction What this case is about?

1. The claimant (Dr Benaris) brings several claims. They are set out in the list of issues below in more detail, but can be summarised as follows:

1.1 Being subjected to a number of detriments for making a number of protected disclosures;
1.2 Being constructively unfairly dismissed for making protected disclosures; and
1.3 Being constructively unfairly dismissed in any case.

2. The respondent (the Trust) denies the claims. It also argues that some of the claims are out of time and so the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to decide them in any event. What this case is not about?

3. It is important to say what we are not deciding. As we made clear at the start, these proceedings

3.1 are not a general public enquiry into the unit at the relevant times;
3.2 are not an enquiry into the care, quality or merits of certain clinical decisions taken from time to time by various people;

4. are not an assessment of the clinical or other merits of various policy decisions taken from time to time (unless that policy impinges on an employment law issue);

4.1 are not an enquiry into or findings about patient safety at the relevant times; and
4.2 are not enquiries into the deaths of any patient. Specifically, they are not answers to those questions which the law requires HM Coroner to answer, that might arise for answer in other proceedings in the civil courts or in an investigation by a relevant regulator. While it may be necessary for us to make findings of fact about some aspects of the circumstances, we do so only insofar as it relates to employment issues. Sometimes the documents or evidence describe a death as suicide. We use that word where we need to maintain fidelity to the language used by others. We make it clear that we are not making any finding about how a person died or expressing a probable verdict where we use that word. Thus, we make findings necessary for us to answer the employment aspects of this case only. To read our judgment deciding issues about matters outside the employment issues would be wrong. The hearing

5. The hearing proceeded as follows.

5.1 Oliver Isaacs, Counsel, instructed by Capital Law, Solicitors, represented Dr Benaris, and Mark Sutton KC, Counsel, instructed by Browne Jacobson, Solicitors, represented the Trust. We would like to thank and commend both advocates. Throughout their advocacy was measured, focused on the issues and they co-operated with each other and the Tribunal to ensure the hearing could proceed efficiently and focus on the real issues. They have said everything that could be said for their respective clients, while maintaining a calm, dispassionate tone. We also commend their thorough, yet focused written and oral closing submissions.
5.2 We heard the following oral evidence:
5.2.1 On the claimant’s behalf from:
5.2.1.1 Dr Marian Benaris, the claimant and consultant psychiatrist;
5.2.1.2 Dr Adrian Vann, in-patient consultant psychiatrist at the Bradgate Unit;
5.2.2 On the respondent’s behalf from:
5.2.2.1 Ms Michelle Churchard-Smith, head of nursing for the Respondent’s Mental Health Directorate until September 2022, and Interim Deputy Director of Nursing and Quality from July 2021 to September 2023 when her appointment became substantive;
5.2.2.2 Mr Mark Powell, Deputy Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director of the Respondent from April 2021 to March 2023;
5.2.2.3 Ms Saskya Falope, a registered Mental Health Nurse, and from October 2019 to end July 2021, team manager for bed management at the Place of Safety Assessment Unit (PSAU) Mental Health Liaison and Mental Health Urgent Care Hub;
5.2.2.4 Dr Srinivas Naik, consultant psychiatrist, and acute pathway Clinical Director for in- patient and acute care pathways at the Trust from March/April 2020 to April/May 2022;
5.2.2.5 Dr Fabida Aria, consultant psychiatrist, and from May 2018 Associate Medical Director of adult mental health and mental health services for older people. She was Dr Naik’s line manager;
5.2.2.6 Dr Avinash Hiremath, Medical Director, interim from May 2020 and substantively from July 2020 to December 2022 when he stepped down. He was Dr Aria’s line manager;
5.2.2.7 Mr Gordon King, a registered Mental Health Nurse. He was the Trust’s interim Director of Mental Health from September 2019. His appointment became permanent in January 2021 and he remained in post until retirement in September 2021; and
5.2.2.8 Ms Sarah Willis, Director of the Trust’s Human Resources and Organisational Development (HR). We have taken their oral evidence into account.

5.3 The bundle consisted of a “main” bundle, a “pleadings” bundle and a “policies and procedures” bundle, though sometimes the distinction appeared arbitrary. By agreement the parties added some documents during the hearing. In total the bundles consisted of 4,131 pages. We were taken to most of the documents (though not necessarily pages) in evidence. As we indicated would be our approach at the start of the hearing, we have considered all those pages to which the parties referred us when we made our decision.
5.4 We are grateful to the respondent’s solicitor for preparing an electronic PDF version of the bundles that complied with the ET Presidential Guidance on remote and in-person hearings dated 14 September 2020 paragraph 24 (“Electronic documents”). This made it far easier to progress the hearing and enabled the Tribunal to use the e-bundles comfortably.
5.5 Each party made closing submissions both orally and in writing. We have given them careful consideration when making our decision.
5.6 The hearing took place on the dates set out in the heading to this judgment. By agreement the parties made their submissions by video link.
5.7 During the hearings, we took appropriate breaks. No other, specific reasonable adjustments were required. There was nothing during the hearing that alerted us to the need for any, either.
5.8 No party has complained this was an unfair hearing. We are satisfied the hearing was fair.

6. The following procedural issues of note arose during the hearing.

6.1 Re-examination about the alleged protected disclosure to the Care Quality Commission (CQC) (PD4): In her re- examination the claimant was asked what exact words she used when she made her alleged protected disclosure to the CQC. The Trust objected to this question.
6.2 After considering the matter, we upheld the respondent’s objection and refused permission to ask the questions for the following reasons:
6.2.1 It was not a matter of re-examination because it did not arise from questions asked in cross-examination.
6.2.2 In fact, it was a matter for evidence-in-chief because it was the fundamental part of the claimant’s case. She was alleging she made a disclosure to the CQC. She would have been aware that proving what she said to them was a key factual matter. It was an obvious matter to deal with in evidence-in-chief.
6.2.3 The claimant had had a fair opportunity to set it out in her witness statement and present it as her evidence- in-chief. There was no good reason why she had not done so. Her statement was significant in length and content, and so its omission was even more inexplicable.
6.2.4 The overriding objective does not assist. While we could be flexible, this is tempered by the need to ensure fairness. The Trust is entitled to know in advance the claimant’s proposed evidence on this issue. The claimant had not disclosed it. It would also require a departure from the usual trial process that the parties would expect i.e. evidence-in-chief and cross-examination based on what they had just told the Tribunal and the case, with optional clarification in re-examination.
6.2.5 Even to allow re-opening of evidence-in-chief and further cross-examination would be unfair. The Trust would for the first time be finding out about a crucial piece of evidence key to the claimant’s case, with minimal opportunity to respond to it.
6.2.6 In essence the parties would not be on an equal footing because the respondent would be ambushed in effect.
6.2.7 The fact that the strict rules of evidence do not apply does not assist because the inherent unfairness remains.
6.3 Late disclosure of documents: During the hearing, the respondent also disclosed some extra documents, late. There was no objection to the documents being admitted, albeit the claimant raised concerns about the disclosure exercise, and the respondent sought to justify the late disclosure. These related significantly to disclosure of a bed management policy and distribution of a gatekeeping policy. We are not convinced there is any good reason these were disclosed late because they seem from the pleaded cases and agreed list of issues to be plainly relevant. However, because the parties agreed we could see the documents and add them to the bundle, we admitted them and invited the parties to defer arguments about credibility arising from late disclosure to submissions in closing. The only order we made was that there be supplemental statements formally introducing them. We also allowed the claimant time to consider them before continuing with the hearing.

7. We reserved our decision. This is that decision. It is unanimous. We cannot deal with every single argument, dispute or issue. It would be disproportionate and unwieldy to do so. We also consider many of them to be irrelevant in that they are not the subject of specific allegations and shed no light on the allegations we must decide. We therefore set out our key findings, but it is based on what we have above said we have taken into account.

8. Co-ordinating the diaries of the Judge and non-legal members, and the Tribunal’s lists meant there was a delay issuing this judgment. We apologise to the parties for that and appreciate their patience. Issues and agreement

9. The issues were agreed between the parties. At the end of the case, they stood as follows: Whistleblowing detriment- s47B Employment Rights Act 1996 (ERA)

10. The Trust accepts the following are protected disclosures insofar as they relate to health and safety:

10.1 Protected Disclosure (PD) 1: Dr Benaris emailing Dr Hiremath on 9 September 2020;
10.2 PD 2: Dr Benaris emailing the Trust’s senior management team, copying in Dr Hiremath, on 25 September 2020;
10.3 PD 3: Dr Benaris emailing Dr Hiremath on 12 March 2021;
10.4 PD 5: Dr Benaris emailing Angela Hillery, Chief Executive Officer, copying in the Trust’s Freedom to Speak Up Guardian, on 14 April 2021;

11. PD 6: Dr Benaris’s emails to Dr Hiremath and Dr Muhammad on 11 July 2021. There is no suggestion that any of the alleged detriments were motivated by e.g. whether the disclosure was also relating to alleged criminal offences. Therefore, while the Trust does not concede the point, after deliberating on the case and noting the claimant did not in closing appear to pursue other bases for which the disclosure was protected, we do not consider the issue of whether any of the above disclosures qualifies under any other heading to be one worth resolving.

12. Did Dr Benaris make one or more qualifying disclosures as defined in the Employment Rights Act 1996 section 43B?

12.1 PD 4: Dr Benaris calling the CQC on 13 April 2021;
12.1.1 What did Dr Benaris say or write? When? To whom?
12.1.2 Did they disclose information?
12.1.3 Did they believe the disclosure of information was made in the public interest?
12.1.4 Was that belief reasonable?
12.1.5 Did they believe it tended to show that the health or safety of any individual had been, was being or was likely to be endangered?
12.1.6 Was that belief reasonable?
12.1.7 Did they believe that the information disclosed, and any allegation contained in it, was substantially true?
12.1.8 Was that belief reasonable?
12.2 There is no dispute that the CQC is a relevant person prescribed by the Secretary of State for this claim for the purposes of ERA section 43F.
12.3 PD 7: The procurement of Patient 3’s admission.
12.3.1 What is the case we must determine? The Trust says it is the procurement itself on which the Tribunal must focus. Dr Benaris says it encompasses the computerised medical notes she made (called “SystmOne” (S1)).
12.3.2 What did Dr Benaris say or write? When? To whom?
12.3.3 Did they disclose information?
12.3.4 Did they believe the disclosure of information was made in the public interest?
12.3.5 Was that belief reasonable?
12.3.6 Did they believe it tended to show that the health or safety of any individual had been, was being or was likely to be endangered?
12.3.7 Was that belief reasonable? There is no dispute that if either or both of the above are qualifying disclosures, then they would be protected disclosures under section 43A.

13. Did the Trust do the following things to Dr Benaris? The numbering reflects the detriment numbers used throughout the case, and we have retained it for continuity. We have also added in the protected disclosures alleged to have caused the detriment and have added in some clarification that the claimant provided after hearing the evidence):

13.1 (withdrawn during the hearing)
13.2 Detriment 2: Subjected her to intense pressure to move from the ward (resulting from PD 1-5 inclusive);
13.3 Detriment 3: Increased hostility by staff and/or patients, and in particular Srinivas Naik and others who had been instigated by Srinivas Naik; (PD 1-7 inclusive);
13.4 Detriment 4: Subjected to malicious and unfounded allegations (PD4-7 inclusive). At the end of the hearing the claimant confirmed those “malicious and unfounded allegations” were:
13.4.1 a comment that she had said that “nurses lowered their standards”;
13.4.2 an allegation the claimant had “shouted” at bed management;
13.4.3 an allegation that the claimant had used clinical notes to criticise other professionals; and
13.4.4 an allegation that the S1 entries for Patient 3 had been used to criticise other professionals.
13.5 Detriment 5: The instigation of a disciplinary process (PD1-7 but particularly 6-7 inclusive);
13.6 Detriment 6: Relocation from the Bradgate Unit (PD1-7 but particularly 6-7 inclusive);
13.7 Detriment 7: Ongoing suspension from on-call work, including once the investigation processes had concluded (PD1-7 but particularly 6-7 inclusive);
13.8 Detriment 8: Teaching responsibilities were removed, and she was removed as a Clinical Supervisor and Educational Supervisor (PD1-7 but particularly 6-7 inclusive);
13.9 Detriment 9: Delay in the resolution of the whistleblowing complaints (PD 6-7 inclusive);
13.10 Detriment 10: Inadequate resolution of the whistleblowing complaints including the failure to consult with Dr Benaris during this process and to provide an unredacted whistleblowing report (PD1-7 but particularly 6-7 inclusive);
13.11 Detriment 11: Reaching irrational conclusions in the disciplinary process (PD1-7 but particularly 6-7 inclusive);
13.12 Detriment 12: Failure to respond to Dr Benaris’s communications seeking a sustainable return to on-call work and to implement a plan for a return to the on-call rota (PD1-7 but particularly 6-7 inclusive);
13.13 Detriment 13: Dr Benaris’s grievance and complaint regarding bullying were not taken seriously and witnesses who could corroborate her complaint were not questioned (PD1-7 but particularly 6-7 inclusive);
13.14 (withdrawn before the hearing);
13.15 Detriment 15: Dr Naik and Ms Falope raising allegations against Dr Benaris which Dr Benaris asserts was in retaliation to her having raised protected disclosures (PD4, 6-7) – this allegation originally included Mr King but Dr Benaris withdrew that allegation in the hearing;
13.16 (withdrawn at the hearing – it is in effect the claim for constructive unfair dismissal which is pursued separately and was not withdrawn)

14. By doing so, did it subject Dr Benaris to detriment?

15. If so, was it done on the ground that they made a protected disclosure? Constructive unfair dismissal

16. Did the Trust do the following things:

16.1 See paragraph 0 above?

17. Did that breach the implied term of trust and confidence? The Tribunal will need to decide:

17.1 whether the Trust behaved in a way that was calculated or likely to destroy or seriously damage the trust and confidence between Dr Benaris and the Trust; and
17.2 whether it had reasonable and proper cause for doing so.

18. Did Dr Benaris resign in response to the breach? The Tribunal will decide whether the breach of contract was a reason for Dr Benaris’s resignation.

19. Did Dr Benaris affirm the contract before resigning? The Tribunal will need to decide whether Dr Benaris’s words or actions showed that they chose to keep the contract alive even after the breach.

20. If Dr Benaris was dismissed, was the reason or principal reason for dismissal (i.e. for the breach of contract) that Dr Benaris made a protected disclosure? If so, Dr Benaris will be regarded as unfairly dismissed.

21. The Trust has not pleaded a potentially fair reason for dismissal (i.e. for breach of contract). Therefore, even if a dismissal was not for making a protected disclosure, it would be unfair in any event (albeit under ERA section 98 not section 103A – and so the statutory cap would apply) Time limits

22. Were the detriment claims made within the time limit in ERA section 48? The Tribunal will decide:

22.1 Was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the act complained of?
22.2 If not, was there a series of similar acts or failures and was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the last one? Dr Benaris does not suggest that, if a claim be out of time, it was not reasonably practicable for her to have presented the claim in time. Remedy

23. We have adjourned the question of remedy, including any issues of contributory fault or arising under the rule in Polkey v AE Dayton Services Ltd [1988] AC 334 to be considered separately. Findings of fact About the witnesses

24. We begin by setting out our views on the witnesses. We form these views based on observations of the totality of their evidence including their demeanour, how they gave evidence and answered questions put to them by both the parties and us.

25. We make allowance for the fact that no person’s memory is a perfect record (and indeed moods can affect what someone recalls and how they recall it), that events took place a long time ago, that giving evidence is not like a natural conversation and that people answer questions in different ways (e.g. perhaps giving an explanation before saying whether they answer yes or no, as may be). We have borne this in mind in making our observations below.

26. We are unhesitatingly satisfied that each witness has told us what that witness believes to be the truth.

27. We comment further on only some of the witnesses where we believe further comment is needed.

27.1 Dr Benaris. It is accepted she is a good clinician who has her patients’ interests at heart. That said, we cannot accept Dr Benaris is a reliable witness. There are a number of concerns we allude to throughout our findings of fact.
27.2 However, the following is relevant at this stage. Generally, she did not answer questions but instead gave a speech, often that bore little relation to the question asked. For example, she took to making clear in many answers that she had reported matters to the CQC and that in her opinion this was a turning point when things became worse for her at the Trust’s hands. This was particularly noticeable later in her cross-examination. Often though this had no relation to the question asked.
27.3 It does not help her credibility she relied heavily on her report to the CQC as a protected disclosure and being the catalyst for the treatment of her but chose in examination in chief to give no evidence about what she actually said to them.
27.4 In addition, we are concerned because not once in any investigation does she tell the investigator the Trust is subjecting her to detriment for whistleblowing, despite the fact that she had the benefit of advice and active representation from both her trade union, the British Medical Association (BMA) and the Medical Protection Society (MPS – her liability insurers), who were plainly alive to the question of whistleblowing and who appeared to provide from what we have seen competent and careful advice and representation on what she told them, and despite knowing everything she knew when she commenced this claim. She does however suggest to the investigators on more than one occasion it is because of her sex, though such an allegation was never before us. If she believed she were being subjected to detriments because of whistleblowing, given her willingness to raise issues and given the professional support she had, we would expect to see it mentioned – especially if PD4 were truly a catalyst as she alleged.
27.5 We were left with the overwhelming impression that she was not here to assist us to discover the truth as such, but to use the opportunity as a way of setting out to the public generally her complaints and criticisms of the Trust and what was occurring and to justify her actions and opinions. In simple terms we saw a performance, speech and self-justification. We are left with the impression that the claim has been picked as a vehicle to enable her to achieve that aim and it is only over time that she has convinced herself that everything is down to protected disclosures.
27.6 Finally, we note that the effect of how she answered questions in cross-examination left us with a strong impression that she is unwilling or unable – we cannot say which – to reflect on her own conduct or how her approach affects others.
27.7 Dr Hiremath. We agree with Dr Benaris’s observations in closing. At times he was open, making concessions and admitting to the limit of his knowledge without trying to fill the gaps. At others he appeared unwilling to accept matters that were otherwise clear. For example, he did not speak to Dr Hamer about PD6. However, in his evidence-in-chief and in cross- examination he maintained he did, until it was shown he was wrong. We also feel the tenor of his evidence came across as placatory, indecisive and being non-committal – in short, he is vague. A significant number of his answers were couched with qualifications and reservations. Not every question permits a yes or no answer, provided the answer given is actually an answer to the question. Often, regrettably, he did not answer the question. We were left with the impression that, as a manager, he was placatory, prevaricated and sought to avoid confrontation and, ultimately, he lacked at the time the skills needed to manage the unit. However, the workplace culture, impact of Covid-19 and his recent appointment with little chance to prepare meant most people would have struggled in the same circumstances. It is no wonder he did.
27.8 Mr Powell. He could remember very little outside of his statement. We make no criticism because events were so long ago but the effect is that we find his evidence of limited value.
27.9 Dr Vann and Mr King. Called by different parties and considered by us individually, but observations are the same. Each gave clear answers, made concessions when appropriate and we were readily persuaded each was here to help the Tribunal rather than to pursue a particular agenda.
27.10 Ms Falope: Ms Falope’s recollection was not, as she fairly conceded, perfect. However, we formed the impression that overall, she was a reliable witness. She answered questions clearly and firmly, conceding matters where appropriate. She did not give speeches and did not attempt to fill any gaps with supposition or opinion.
27.11 Dr Naik. Initially he was confrontational and defensive in the witness box, reluctant to concede anything. However, at one point he asked the Tribunal Judge about the questions, saying he had already had his clinical practice investigated because of these events and had his then-decisions approved, and he felt this was another attack on his clinical abilities. The Judge explained the Tribunal was interested only in the employment issues and that the questions relate to employment issues. The Tribunal further confirmed to him that it would not be judging the clinical decision-making of any doctor. After that we believe he became more amenable, making concessions where appropriate, and being clear about his evidence overall. Despite our initial concerns, his demeanour and answers after the Judge dealt with his concern lead us to conclude he is a reliable witness. Note about the patients in this case

28. This case involves 3 patients. Before us they were identified as Patients 1, 2 and 3. We have not been told their identities. We use the same labels as the parties, and for grammatical simplicity refer to each as he, him etc. because we are unaware of their gender or sex. About the respondent

29. The respondent is an NHS Trust charged with the provision of mental health care in Leicester and Leicestershire. It provides treatment in the community and to in-patients. The Bradgate Unit is an in-patient unit. It is divided into a number of wards. During the time of this case, the admissions ward was the Beaumont Ward.

30. The Trust has access to advice from an overarching service called NHS Resolution or Practitioner Performance Advice. They are akin to a human resources (HR) advisory service. It is important to note they do not run the Trust’s HR services or make decisions about HR issues that arise in the trust. A manager contacts them for advice, relays to them the fact and, based on those facts, they provide a response. We note that at various points people in the Trust, particularly Dr Hiremath, contacted them for advice and accepted their advice. We have not detailed when that happened in general because we do not believe it assists us to decide the claim. Terms of the claimant’s employment

31. The Trust employed the claimant as a psychiatrist from 1 August 2011, though she joined the trust in August 2008. Her earlier career is not material. She worked with adult patients. At the start of the period relevant to this claim she was based at the Bradgate Unit. She has a long career and significant experience. We do not need to go into it in any more detail. There is no dispute she is a competent, able psychiatrist.

32. Her contract of employment contained the following terms.

3. General Mutual Obligations Whilst it is necessary to set out formal employment arrangements in this contract, we also recognise that you are a senior and professional employee who will usually work unsupervised and frequently have the responsibility for making important judgements and decisions. It is essential therefore that you and we work in a spirit of mutual trust and confidence. You and we agree to the following mutual obligations in order to achieve the best for patients and to ensure the efficient running of the service: ♦ to co-operate with each other; ♦ to maintain goodwill; ♦ to carry out our respective obligations in agreeing and operating a Job Plan; ♦ to carry out our respective obligations in accordance with appraisal arrangements; ♦ to carry out our respective obligations in devising, reviewing, revising and following the organisation’s policies, objectives, rules, working practices and protocols.

33. The said job plan is referred to in clause 6. It comprises “programmed activities” which are units of time for activities such as direct clinical care (DCC), additional responsibilities and “supporting professional activities” such as teaching, administration and job planning. This job plan is reviewed and agreed between the doctor and their manager each year.

34. Dr Benaris’s was required to abide by the Good Medical Practice requirements of the General Medical Council (GMC – the regulator of doctors). It is divided into Domains. These domains set out what one would expect of good medical practice in certain contexts. It is agreed that

34.1 Domain 1, Knowledge Skills and Developments, requires a doctor to consult colleagues or seek advice from superiors if in doubt and to be collaborative with colleagues and all other members of the clinical team e.g. nurses, resident doctors, health care assistants etc.

35. Domain 3, Colleagues, culture and safety, requires doctors to treat colleagues with kindness, courtesy and respect. It promotes collaborative working and teamwork.

35.1 The document also promotes continuity of care and the requirement to share information across the team. Policies

36. Dr Benaris’s employment was subject to various policies. We set out those which are relevant. They have various dates but no-one has suggested the terms were irrelevant to the material times of this case. Freedom to Speak Up: Raising Concerns (Whistleblowing) Policy

37. The policy provided a flowchart on how to raise concerns.

38. In clause 7.0, it said staff are responsible for reporting any concern which may affect patient safety or care.

39. Appendix 2 sets out a 5-step approach for managers, headed: Welcome, Listen, Reflect, Action, Feedback. The latter specifically provided that a manager:

• [give feedback] [to] the individual informing them of lessons learned
• Acknowledge and give explicit credit if impact on patient care
• Openly thank them for having courage to speak up.

40. Appendix 7 described how to conduct an investigation. If the Manager feels they are unable to conduct the investigation, they should contact their Head of Service / Director. … All allegations concerning harm to children, young people or vulnerable adults must be reported to the Trust Safeguarding Lead / or safeguarding named nurse for the service. The Manager should investigate the issue of concern in a timely, sensitive, confidential and thorough manner and then report back to the employee who raised the concern, advising either the findings, or what further action, if any, will be taken. … If an ‘Investigating Officer’ is required, they will be appointed by the Head of Service, Director or Chief Executive. This person will not have been previously involved in the situation and will be independent (usually from a different part of the organisation). In certain circumstances this person may need to be someone external to the Trust. Anti-Bullying, Harassment and Victimisation (Dignity at Work) Policy

41. It defined bullying as: Workplace bullying is defined under ‘Agenda for Change’ as “the unwanted behaviour, one to another, which is based upon the Unwarranted use of authority or power.” Acas characterises bullying as offensive, intimidating, malicious or insulting behaviour, an abuse or misuse of power through means that undermine, humiliate, denigrate or injure the recipient.

42. It said the Trust Board oversaw the policy and managers needed to take all reasonable steps to make sure bullying and harassment does not occur on their watch.

43. It also provided in paragraph 10.2 that the Trust was committed to achieving informal resolution of complaints wherever possible, and mediation must be offered when concerns are raised with a line manager. Dr Hiremath agreed a manager should follow this to promote workplace harmony.

Managing Concerns about Medical Staff

44. The policy is intended to outline the Maintaining High Professional Standards in the NHS (MHPS) scheme and how it works in the Trust. Like the parties, we will refer to this simply as MHPS.

45. The Trust has access to NHS Resolution, formally called the National Clinical Assessment Service (NCAS), and certain provisions of MHPS require liaison with NCAS. NCAS is described in the MHPS as an advisory body that works to resolve concerns about the practice of doctors by providing case management services to healthcare organisations and individual practitioners. While case managers can contact it for advice but it does not conduct investigations or make decisions itself – that responsibility remains with the Trust. Doctors themselves can also contact NCAS for advice.

46. Paragraph 1.2 sets out the policy’s aims: This policy aims to provide a clear set of procedures which can be referred to when concerns arise about medical staff. The purpose is to support the delivery of a transparent and fair approach to the management of concerns of medical employees, how to approach remediation and to ensure that patient safety is the paramount consideration.

47. The policy defines Concerns about practice as follows. Any aspects of a practitioner’s practice, performance, conduct or behaviour which may:

• pose a threat to patient safety or public protection
• expose services to financial or other substantial risk
• undermine the reputation or efficiency of services in some significant way
• be outside acceptable professional or working practice guidelines and standards. and makes clear that patient safety is the paramount consideration. It also makes it clear in paragraph 3.3 that the scheme is to address those concerns that are not so minor that they can await normal continuing professional development (CPD) training.

48. The scheme is divided into 5 parts. In summary they are as follows.

48.1 Part I sets out the action required when a concern arises. In short, a case manager (a person who oversees the investigation) meets with the doctor concerned. The meeting is an opportunity to set out the concern. The policy says specifically at paragraph 6.2 The objective is to determine whether an investigation would be likely to produce information which is not already available, not to begin the investigation process itself. There will normally need to be input from the practitioner.
48.2 Paragraph 6.6 provides for a formal investigation. Investigation will usually be appropriate where case information gathered in the screening process suggests that the practitioner may:

• Pose a threat or potential threat to patient safety;
• Expose services to financial or other substantial risk;
• Undermine the reputation or efficiency of services in some significant way;
• Work outside acceptable practice guideline and standards. It is for the Medical Director either to be the case manager (in cases concerning consultants) or to appoint someone else as case manager. The case manager appoints an investigator and sets out the terms of reference.

48.3 The case manager has to write to the doctor under investigation setting out among other things the specific allegations or concerns and whom they will interview.
48.4 Paragraph 6.15 provides that the investigation should conclude within 4 weeks with a report 5 days thereafter.
48.5 The case manager must then decide whether there is e.g. a case of misconduct (which will result in the Trust’s disciplinary policy being invoked), or concerns about health (which would invoke the ill-health policy) or performance which would invoke a referral to NHS Resolution for advice. It also raises possibilities of imposing restrictions on work or referral to the GMC.
48.6 Part II deals with restriction of practice and exclusions. It says as follows.
10.3 Exclusion of practitioners from the workplace is a temporary expedient. It is a precautionary measure and not a disciplinary sanction, reserved for specific circumstances. Alternatives to exclusion must always be considered in the first instance….
10.5 Where exclusion is required, the process outlined in Part II of MHPS must be adhered to. Part II gives guidance on the following

• Immediate exclusion – maximum of 2 weeks
• Formal exclusion
• Keeping exclusions under review
• Returning to work following exclusion

48.7 Part III provides any issues of misconduct be dealt with under the Trust’s Disciplinary and Policy Procedure.
48.8 Part IV provides a detailed scheme for dealing with capability issues.
48.9 Part V provides a scheme for dealing with concerns about health of a doctor and expressly sits alongside the Trust’s ill-health policy.

49. The policy also provides a framework for gauging levels of concern for green (complaints etc.), amber (potential for serious harm) and red (harm caused and likely to warrant referral to GMC).

50. The parties do not agree whether an investigation under this policy is disciplinary or to be considered as part of the disciplinary policy. The claimant says it is and the respondent says otherwise.

51. We prefer the Trust’s position and find as a fact that investigation under MHPS is not itself part of a disciplinary policy, for the following reasons. The aim of the scheme and the focus is to establish facts and only the facts about what has happened or is happening and to resolve any difficulty as quickly and informally as possible. This is supported by its stated aim, its reference to informal and (we believe we can infer) quick resolution of concerns if possible, and that after the investigation is completed, only then does the case manager have to consider if there be a disciplinary, capability or ill-health issue that arises for consideration. We accept it could lead to a disciplinary process but that does not make the policy inherently disciplinary, any more than the fact it could lead to a capability process makes it inherently about capability or an ill-health process makes it about ill-health. The MHPS policy as a whole conveys to the reasonable reader that it is about, and only about, finding out what has happened so the case manager can make an informed decision about whether there be a concern and what to do about it.

GMC raising concerns policy

52. This policy reassures the doctors it regulates that they have a duty to raise concerns, put patient’s interests first and that they do not need to wait for proof to justify those concerns before raising them, provided the doctor acts honestly, based on reasonable belief and acts through appropriate channels. It says a doctor who acts accordingly need not be concerned about being mistaken. Admission of patients, the on-call rota and the patient’s status

53. In-patients can be informally (i.e. voluntarily) admitted or instead formally admitted (i.e. detained) for treatment under the Mental Health Act 1983 (MHA) sections 2 or 3. This is often referred to as being “sectioned” but we will use the more neutral phrase of “formally admitted” or similar. Most patients are admitted informally. Emergency admission under section 4 MHA is not relevant to this claim.

54. The process for formal admission works in practice as follows (so far as

relevant):

54.1 2 doctors assess and recommend formal admission of the patient. One doctor must be approved by the Secretary of State under section 12 of the MHA. We refer to such doctors as “section-12 approved”. Dr Benaris was a section-12 approved doctor.
54.2 Ideally one doctor should know the patient, but that is not a legal requirement.
54.3 If the doctors agree the patient be formally admitted, the matter is referred to an Approved Mental Health Professional (AMHP). They are a social worker from the local authority. If they agree, then they are the ones who legally apply for admission under section 11. We need not concern ourselves with what happens if they disagree.
54.4 The professionals complete a document or series of documents colloquially called a pink form (based on their original colour).
54.5 The AMHP does not have to complete the form at the same time as the doctors but section 11 provides they have 14 days to request admission starting from the date of the second doctor’s assessment.

55. If the MHPS needs a consultant, they can consult an app to see who is on- call and contact them. The consultants operate a rota for being on-call. We discuss this rota and the app later.

56. There is a dispute about when the admission process begins. We do not consider it beneficial to resolve that issue.

57. Finally, it is relevant to explain the effect of a patient’s status. A voluntarily admitted patient may discharge themselves at any time. An involuntarily admitted patient may not – they are in effect detained. However, a number of involuntarily detained patients would be allowed to return to the community while still involuntarily detained.

58. The Unit also has a bed management team. It consists of non-medically qualified personnel and nurses. Their role is to allocate a bed to a patient. They are comparable to a booking service at e.g. a hotel but more sophisticated in that they ensure a bed is available in the relevant ward, keep track of where patients are and moving to, and search for beds when a patient is to be admitted. Covid-19

59. In the background to this case was the Covid-19 pandemic of 2020-2022. It was particularly acute in Leicester. We do not need to delve into the history. For present purposes we can summarise it as follows. In late 2019- 2020 there appeared a (in human) novel severe acute respiratory coronavirus – Covid 19. It spread around the world and caused a pandemic. It was easily transmissible between humans. Some who caught it were asymptomatic. However, it caused ‘flu-like symptoms in many, was deadly in a notable minority of cases (particularly in the early phases) and required many to be admitted to hospital because of breathing difficulties. In the early period the government issued guidance to e.g. hospitals which was updated regularly to try to contain its spread. We had heard about the general guidance in this case but have not been taken to it and do not feel we need to go into it in any detail than that which we do below.

60. In the UK, the government introduced lockdown on spring 2020. We can conveniently take that as a nominal point that the pandemic was definitely present in the UK. March 2020 - the Beaumont admissions ward and gatekeeping policy

61. The Unit consists of a number of wards. Before Covid-19, a patient would be admitted to a ward depending on availability and whether the ward was appropriate for that patient (e.g. gender, illness etc.).

62. In response to the Covid-19 pandemic, the Trust decided to restructure the wards. All patients were admitted to the Beaumont Ward. They would be tested for Covid-19. If they were positive, then they would remain in that ward until they had recovered. If they were negative, then they would remain there for a few days, being tested regularly. They would then move to another ward as a patient.

63. On 16 March 2020 Dr Aria announced the inception of the change to Beaumont ward by email. It was via a Ms Raynor forwarded to Dr Benaris. The email also provided that admissions should be only in extreme circumstances and that Informal admissions need to go through a strict protocol via bed management to include discussions with consultants- community/crt and inpatient as needed. Dr Naik and Dr Khokhar are supporting gatekeeping via mental health triage team as well.

64. On 20 March 2020 Dr Aria emailed doctors below consultants with a flowchart and about the gatekeeping scheme. She had Ms Raynor forward it to the consultants. The email said as follows. We are making a strict gatekeeping process for admissions during this period, because we want to be sure that is the only option we have and to minimise risks to patients. … Please do not see this process of a gatekeeping by one of the 3 consultants as something to override an opinion from a colleague- it is sincerely to help the patient with other options. If it is not felt to be safe it will not be done. We had a few admissions in the last few days who came in at night and were discharged the next morning. Consultants were not involved in admission.

65. It contained a flowchart. In short, informal admissions led to either consulting the community team to consider diversion from admission, waiting to the next day or if that were not possible calling the on-call consultant. Assessments under the MHA followed a different process. If an involuntary admission, then the patient was to be admitted. If not, then the doctor was to call the on-call consultant. In a separate box, that does not follow from any of the paths outlined above are the numbers of Dr Naik, Dr Khokhar and Dr Aria under the label For all information admissions, including after MHAs. They are distinguished from the role of on-call consultant. While not expressly identified as such, it is agreed that they are gatekeepers.

66. There are numerous disputes about it. There is a dispute about its status as a policy, guidance, standard operating procedure or otherwise, though no-one at the time seemed bothered by this to any great degree. There is a dispute about whether it was binding on consultants or aimed at doctors below consultant grade.

67. The policy is not as well drafted as it could be. For example, the flowchart does not demonstrate when gatekeepers were to be involved or what their role was, really. We must note however that this was a testing time because of Covid-19: The luxury of time for finer drafting was not available to the writers, as they may have wished.

68. We conclude that it was aimed at doctors below consultant-grade. That tallied with the evidence we heard and also with the fact it was sent to the consultants after it had been sent to the doctors on lower grades, and the accompanying email referred to consultants were not involved in admission which would be a curious point to make if it were aimed at consultants.

69. We do not accept that Drs Naik, Khokhar or Aria were being given a veto on admissions. There is no evidence we have seen to show they did ever veto or try to veto admissions. It is common ground a right of veto would be contrary to patient best-practice. In addition, the flowchart did not identify them as having a veto. Dr Aria makes it clear that that the scheme was not to override a colleague, but to promote consideration of alternative options. Dr Naik’s own evidence confirmed that it was a collaborative approach. He explained that in the last 15 years he had never experienced a situation where colleagues could not reach an agreement on the proposed treatment of a patient.

70. The impression we were left with from Dr Vann was this is how he understood it. We note that he did contact the gatekeepers during his practice to sense-check with them. He did not suggest they had a power of veto over his decision to admit.

71. We are satisfied that Dr Benaris knew all of this, and that speaking to a gatekeeper was not about vetting her decision, but sense-checking with a colleague, as condoned by the GMC’s guidance on good practice. She had access to the same information as other consultants.

72. Therefore, issues about whether it were a policy, guidance etc. are irrelevant because the consultants knew what the practical expectations were and how it worked on the ground. Taking into account everything in this case, we conclude that the only real objections were not to its status, but to the idea of consulting with another colleague.

May 2020 - Dr Hiremath goes in post

73. As noted earlier, it is May that Dr Hiremath steps into post. Therefore, he is taking over at a time when the Unit is under severe stress because of Covid-

19. It is also worth noting the gatekeeping policy was introduced before he was in post. 9 September 2020 - review of the Beaumont Ward

74. There was a dispute between the doctors in the Unit about this set-up. Some believed it was problematic because if a patient did not have Covid- 19, they would still be in a ward with patients who did have Covid-19. Patients intermingled, and its easy transmission meant it would spread. In addition, there was a risk someone had the virus but would be moved because they did not yet test positive. Others said that simply admitting patients to any ward would mean there was a real risk that Covid-19 would spread quickly through the hospital. The use of Beaumont gave the best chance of keeping Covid-19 in one place. The Tribunal is not qualified or required to decide which was the better opinion. However as non-medically qualified people, we can see force to both positions. We also accept that the concerns were genuine, honestly held and appeared to us to be reasonable.

75. The ward was also a high-pressured environment that was taking its toll on doctors of all grades. There was limited bedspace, time, resources, physical as well as mental illness and patients were not co-operative with the requirement to isolate to minimise the risk of Covid-19 spreading. Staff were stretched trying to control the ward so it was safe.

76. The Trust acknowledged the risk. On 9 September 2020, Ms Churchard- Smith reviewed the admissions ward. She added it to the register of risks and identified a number of concerns. Because of the pressure of the ward, she noted a risk of staff stress and burnout, risk of harm to patients and staff and risk of staff leaving. She used a scoring matrix which rated the risk as 20/ – the highest risk rating is 25/, and suggested that maybe it should 25 25 be that highest rating. Management and senior clinician meeting and complaint 9 September 2021

77. On 8 September 2020, there was a meeting between senior clinicians and management about the Unit. Dr Benaris attended as consultant attached to the Beaumont Ward. Professor Al-Uzri, a consultant on the Watermead Ward and Dr Abbas, a consultant on the Ashby Ward, attended too.

78. It appears the meeting was fractious. We do not have notes of the meeting. However, the next day, Prof Al-Uzri emailed Dr Hiremath with allegations about Dr Benaris’s behaviour. He alleged that Dr Benaris had made untrue statements accusing staff at Ashby ward and Watermead ward of delaying and preventing transfers from Beaumont ward leading to prolonged stay of patients on Beaumont ward. He said many had complained about her tone at that meeting.

9 September 2020 – PD1

79. On 9 September 2020 10:28 Dr Benaris sent an email to Dr Hiremath. This is PD1. The email raised concerns about:

79.1 patient and staff safety, citing that there was no clear management plan resulting in abuse and threats of violence to staff,
79.2 the community teams were not handing over patients to in-ward staff.
79.3 morale and workload, and
79.4 a lack of therapeutic activities for patients in the day.

80. The email is from Dr Benaris’s account and signed off by Dr Benaris, Dr Randall and Dr Acharya. It is accepted the latter 2 doctors endorsed its terms.

81. This is one of the matters that in our view undermines Dr Benaris’s evidence and suggests she is unreliable. In both her evidence-in-chief and grounds of complaint she did not mention Dr Randall and Dr Acharya being co- signatories. Rather, she gave the impression it was she alone who made a protected disclosure (and as a result the Trust subjected her to detriments). She sought to maintain this position in cross-examination and defended this representation when asked about it. In our view Dr Benaris’s evidence misrepresented matters. It is not a disclosure from her alone. It takes on a different significance when one recognises other doctors signed it too because it widens the enquiry: how might they have been treated? Their treatment is relevant to deciding whether it is credible the disclosure resulted in the Trust subjecting Dr Benaris to particular treatment. There is no evidence that either of the other co-signatories were subjected to any detriment for whistleblowing. We therefore find as a fact that they were not.

82. Dr Hiremath did not act on the email. He believed that any concerns had been addressed in a meeting of the consultants that day. There are no notes however of the meeting. On balance we accept that this is what Dr Hiremath thought. There is no evidence of this disclosure playing any role later in relation to anyone’s thinking. The lack of action against the co- signatories tends to suggest the protected disclosure did not cause the Trust to subject the signatories to detriments. Dr Benaris was not reliable as a witness and has misrepresented at least some of the facts surrounding this specific disclosure. On the other hand, doing nothing formally about it accords with Dr Hiremath’s general approach to management in this case. It is not because they made a protected disclosure, it is because he lacked the management skills to process it. We also concluded from the evidence that he would seek to avoid confrontation. There is no reason to believe he ignored it because it was a protected disclosure. There is nothing to show he reacted adversely to this disclosure. We note that Dr Benaris did not even seem to chase it up at the time, which lends weight to the suggestion it had been dealt with or was not important. Taking that and our view of his approach as a manager, it seems more likely to us there was no formal response to it because he did not occur to him one was needed. We find that as a fact accordingly. 17 September 2020 – Dr Hiremath orders preliminary fact finding in relation to allegations against Dr Benaris

83. He did however order a preliminary fact-find into the allegations in Prof Al- Uzri’s email. We are satisfied for reasons above this was not motived by PD1 being a protected disclosure. Reflecting on the above, we consider it more likely than not the fact there was a protected disclosure was not in his mind when decided to order this fact finding. We also believe it is important that the allegations arose from Prof Al-Uzri. There is no allegation he acted as he did because Dr Benaris made a protected disclosure. We also note that, if true, the allegations against Dr Benaris are arguably a breach of the domains in the GMC’s Good Medical Practice. The seriousness therefore of the allegations from someone who is not motivated by a protected disclosure also points away from the disclosure being a relevant factor. About 25 September 2020 – Patient 1 – PD2

84. Each ward had a garden. Patients could access their ward’s garden. The perimeter of the garden was fenced to try to prevent irregular egress. Irregular egress could pose a risk to a patient because they might be without medical treatment and so be a risk to themselves, and maybe to one or more members of the public. For involuntary patients it would also be in conflict with their admission under the Mental Health Act 1983.

85. A risk assessment on 6 June 2020 noted this risk and provided the garden should therefore be supervised constantly. The later Serious Incident Review (SI review) into the death of Patient 1 noted that none of the nursing staff were aware of this requirement at that time. Therefore the garden was not supervised but only checked every 15 minutes. Dr Benaris says she did not realise the garden was unsupervised. We do not consider it matters if this were her belief or not. The defensiveness that we refer to below is just as consistent with her holding this belief as it is with not holding it. Whether she believed it or not sheds no light on the employment issues in our view. We put it to one side.

86. The said review shows that there had been an MHA assessment of Patient 1 but he was not suitable for involuntary admission. He agreed to be admitted on 24 September 2020 informally. There was an agreement that he should be reassessed or the assessment resumed if he were to seek to leave. Dr Benaris was his treating consultant at the Unit. There were no identified concerns about the admissions process at all.

87. Patient 1 entered the garden on 25 September 2020. The review shows that between 11:30 and 11:45 he had fled from the garden. He was found that evening, deceased.

88. On 25 September 2020 12:53 (so after Patient 1 fled but before he was found), Dr Benaris emailed Ms Churchard-Smith, copying in Dr Hiremath and others about it, saying that the garden needed a member of staff present at all times. We agree with the respondent the tone of this email is unnecessarily accusatorial in tenor. It does not appear to show that Dr Benaris reflected on her own role in the process.

89. One part of that role is that in the email Dr Benaris herself said she had directed that Patient 1 only needed looking in on every 10 minutes (called level 2 supervision). We do not make any finding of fact on whether that was medically correct. We can see that it could be possible for a patient to require 10- minute supervision but the garden generally to require permanent supervision (which would align with the Trust’s own risk assessment, of which nurses were unaware). We can also see that a consultant in Dr Benaris’s position might after the event at least stop to reflect on whether in hindsight that was appropriate. She does not do that.

90. The other part is that Dr Benaris herself escorted the patient to the ward without notifying bed management in advance, despite Patient 1’s high risk of aggression to others (see the SI review). She also gave an oral handover briefing. This is contrary to the bed management processes – where instead the bed management team allocate a bed and arrange for patient transfer to the bed in the allocated ward when a bed is available. We consider again that a consultant in Dr Benaris’s position would reflect on that aspect – particularly as it was a breach of procedures which Dr Benaris would have known about as a consultant. We agree with the Trust. This is a defensive email in the circumstances. We also consider it is reasonable that Dr Hiremath would put it to one side because he was merely carbon-copied in, and the 6 main recipients were nursing staff.

91. Jane Capes, Senior Manager and Matron, replied within 5 minutes of the email. She asked if Patient 1 were known to be at risk of absconding before admission, whether he were an involuntary patient or whether he should have gone to the psychiatric intensive care unit (PICU). She pointed out that nurses could not pull back a patient who was scaling the fence. Dr Benaris’s response was sent 5 minutes later and was curt: The information is all in the notes. First presentation. MHA assessment but agreed to come in informally. Walked with me from PSAU to the ward. PICU

- no indication for this at time of admission. It did not answer all of Ms Cape’s questions. We accept the respondent’s characterisation that it was defensive rather than collaborative or helpful. That is shown by the cursory reference to the notes but elaboration on reasons for her own actions.

92. Later that day Dr Hiremath emailed all involved as follows. Folks, I appreciate we are trying to make a point about safety. But lets not continue with a chain of emails with patients details in it. I propose the conversation stays within the Bradgate ecosystem and it will be obviously brought to the attention of the right people. It is helpful for me to know, but I suggest we stop the email chain. We consider this was a sensible and reasonable step.

93. Dr Benaris says this led her to be increasingly concerned about the safety of patients generally. We do not accept this. Firstly, she was hardly co- operative when providing the information Ms Capes sought. Secondly, she does not appear ever to reflect on her own practices, as the incident in relation to Patient 3 confirms.

94. The incident was investigated as part of the Serious Incident report, which we address later. November 2020 – Dr Hiremath tells Dr Benaris about the complaint from Prof Al- Uzri.

95. On 12 November 2020 Dr Hiremath emailed Dr Benaris to set up a meeting the next day. He said it was nothing for her to worry about. Dr Benaris called Dr Hiremath. In that call he told her about Prof. Al-Uzri’s complaint. We cannot see any good reason for the delay. We cannot however see any link to any protected disclosures. On balance we conclude the delay is a manifestation of Dr Hiremath’s management style.

96. Dr Benaris alleged that that Dr Hiremath suggested that she should apologise to Prof. Al-Uzri. This is disputed. If we assume Dr Benaris is correct, we do not consider it assists to determine whether the Trust’s management staff were unfairly targeting Dr Benaris. The general tenor of the case is that the doctors are divided and the ward is not working well. Even if Dr Hiremath did say this, there are plenty of accusations being made the other way. We do not accept this would show some particular trend of adverse treatment towards Dr Benaris. If it were said, we would be satisfied it is a clumsy attempt to try to restore peace and co-operative practices, rather than of some hostile animus towards Dr Benaris. That reflects Dr Hiremath’s approach, Dr Benaris’s tendency not to simply relay facts in a neutral manner and the general dysfunction in the Unit. 26 January 2021 – Draft SI review

97. On 26 January 2021, a draft of the SI review was sent to Dr Benaris and others. The review recorded that (so far as relevant):

97.1 Admission of Patient 1 was correct,
97.2 Confirmed that Dr Benaris walked Patient 1 over rather than using the bed management process
97.3 That staff on Beaumont Ward had endeavoured to maximise the chance of Patient 1’s admission being a success. Each was given an opportunity to make observations on it. 29 January 2021 – Options for the admissions ward

98. On 29 January 2021, Dr Aria raised the issue of who should work on which wards. She noted the use of the Beaumont Ward was likely to remain long- term while Covid-19 remained a significant risk. She wrote Whilst until now we were planning for a time limited approach we need to plan longer term now. It is unfair for any consultant to be on an admission ward long term. So we are now considering the best option is to share the beds on the admission ward to the consultants who can work on an amber ward…. That only leaves the following consultants who can share the beds- [Dr] Adrian [Vann], [Dr] Beena [Kumari], [Dr] Steve Dyer, [Dr] Mariam [Benaris] and [Dr] Sudha [Acharya]…. If we were to divide 22 beds, at a calculation of 2 beds per pa we can plan this together. Beena, Adrian and Mariam are part time at 4 days a week … Can we please discuss how we divide this, or do we go for the other option of rotating for few months at a time? I am ok with this to give Sudha and Mariam a break….

99. We find that the motivation for this was a genuine concern for the welfare of Dr Benaris and Dr Acharya. Dr Aria identifies both as needing a break, which tends to suggest this is not about Dr Benaris alone. The Beaumont Ward was also highly demanding. Patients were refusing or failing to co- operate with the requirement to isolate. Some had Covid-19, some would be at particular risk if they caught it. Most if not all patients went through the ward. In addition, the manifestation of the symptoms of poor mental health is challenging. It is inherently plausible that one might think it would be mentally exhausting for a doctor permanently allocated to the ward, even if that doctor could not acknowledge the effect on them. 5 February 2021 Dr Benaris comments on Draft SI review

100. Dr Benaris commented on the draft report. There are only two comments worth noting, as follows. Concerning patient access to the garden. When Beaumont Ward was re- purposed as an acute (psych) admissions ward suitable for Covid, patient access to the garden was initially strictly limited — only available intermittently with direct staff supervision. At some point this changed to unrestricted access and although I do not recall a particular communication about this in terms of timing, I recall the absconsion risk report I mentioned during the StEIS meeting [sic.] (risk #827 version 17 dated 4.6.20) gave assurances about the need for continuous staffing to offset garden access risks. As such, it was my understanding at the time of Mr B’s admission that, given patients were permitted unrestricted garden access, there were corresponding arrangements in place to ensure continuous staff presence/supervision. Continuing in this thread but on the matter of ward acuity; you may find it useful to know that the use of Beaumont Ward as an acute high acuity admissions ward during Covid was subject to extensive staff discussion such that it was placed on the Risk Register on 8th September 2020. Should you wish to review this document, the report number (on the Ulysses system) is 4600.

101. We pick these out because we consider they show Dr Benaris adopting a defensive approach to the review. They are attempts to justify her actions and point blame to others, even though the draft review is rather neutral in its tone – and certainly does not cast blame on Dr Benaris. The writers nonetheless looked into these points before producing their finalised SI review. 12 March 2021 – Dr Benaris emails Dr Hiremath – PD3

102. After Patient 1 absconded, the garden was constantly supervised. At some point before 12 March 2021, a decision was taken after discussion between various people from the nursing teams and health and safety teams to reduce supervision to every 15 minutes. Dr Benaris and the other consultants were not involved in making this decision.

103. On 12 March 2021, Dr Benaris discovered that the garden was again not being supervised. She emailed Dr Hiremath on 12 March 2021. She wrote: …I was then told the ward garden is now open to patients unsupervised at all times. Prior to this it was always supervised following the suicide [sic.] of Patient 1. I am incredibly distressed that this decision was made without any discussion with me. I was not even informed until I checked again today. I have already raised numerous concerns about the risks on the ward and my concerns are always dismissed or ignored. On top of that, I feel like I have been misrepresented as a "difficult consultant" when patient safety and care is my main concern. I have also raised concerns about the shortage of junior drs and despite taking a proactive role in managing this last July, I was told to stop micro- managing. This remains a problem on a weekly basis and I am frustrated that all my concerns are dismissed.

104. The Trust (rightly) accepts that Dr Benaris was correct to complain about this development. The Trust also picks up on the word following as suggesting she always knew the garden was not supervised before Patient 1’s death. We accept it is a possibility but the use could equally refer to a change in policy on supervision after Patient 1’s death. Her belief is in our view not relevant as we said above, so we say no more about it. Ms Capes emailed Dr Benaris the same day, apologising for not telling her of the change. We are satisfied it was a genuine oversight given the apology and the lack of any reason to keep the change from her.

105. On 14 March 2021, Dr Hiremath replied to Dr Benaris. He offered a discussion either by phone or in person. She did not reply to that email. Those discussions did not happen. We find as a fact that this was effectively her choice because she did not respond and take up his offer. The facts demonstrate she had no difficulty otherwise raising issues with him. There is no basis to believe she was unable to respond for some (unidentified) reason. 16 March 2021 – Dr Benaris comments further on the draft SI review

106. Dr Benaris sought to make further comments on the draft review on 16 March 2021. Two matters stand out

106.1 She again emphasised the garden was supervised, and introduced the change on 12 March 2021 in supervision levels,
106.2 She also sought again to address her non-use of the bed management team and the bed management system, describing them merely as to communicate information from the assessing team to the ward. She explained she could give a first-hand account and asked What could the bed management team add further? Given her role and how long she had worked in the Unit, we are satisfied she knew the bed management team were more than just a conduit of relaying information. We accept the Trust’s submission this is demonstrating of a wilful playing down of the bed management’s role to deflect criticism of her own conduct. This is another continuation of the lack of self-reflection and the tactical nature of her communications to deflect criticism. 18 March 2021 – Ms Puckey complains about Dr Benaris

107. Ms Marie Puckey was the ward manager for Beaumont Ward and so worked alongside Dr Benaris. On 18 March 2021 she complained to Dr Naik and Dr Aria about Dr Benaris. She wrote as follows. On Friday 12th march whilst I was talking to staff in the main nursing office, Dr Benaris came into the office and stated very rudely and abruptly that she wanted the garden closing now. She asked who had made the decision to open the garden. I explained to her that the trust had made the decision in January and after meeting with Jane Capes that same day we had made the decision to open the garden. She stated I had no right to make this decision as yet again she hadn’t been consulted or included in the trust decision. I offered to show her the email from Michelle Churchard explaining the trusts [sic.] decision but she said I don’t want to see it. I also tried to explain what steps we had put in place to observe the garden but she did not want to listen to these. Dr Benaris stated that all her patients are extremely suicidal and are going to go and abscond and kill themselves. She then walked out of the office. I don’t feel the way Dr Benaris approached me was professional or acceptable. She was rude and abrupt and did this in front of 2 qualified nurses and a HCSW. These staff were left shocked and appalled by the way she had spoken to me and approached me.

108. In her interview with Ms Diane Pugh she described how she was shocked and degraded because of the imbalance between a consultant and nurse – the former carrying more perceived seniority than the latter.

109. There are various discussions behind the scenes about how to deal with this but we note as follows:

109.1 If true, it would show a serious, unprofessional approach to colleagues by Dr Benaris that could damage working relationships and undermine trust and confidence between colleagues,
109.2 In turn that would be damaging to the work of the ward and Unit,
109.3 Dr Hiremath thinks it concerns professional behaviour and requires a preliminary investigation.
109.4 Ms Angela West advised that the complaint engaged the MHPS process because of its contents,
109.5 Dr Acovski was appointed to investigate the matter, and
109.6 Dr Aria told Dr Benaris of Dr Acovski’s appointment on 24 March 2021. Absence

110. The claimant was absent from work between 27 March and 13 April 2021.

Death of Patient 2

111. On 5 April 2021, Patient 2 died on Beaumont Ward. It is described in the documents before us as being because of suicide.

13 April 2021 – complaint to the CQC – PD4

112. On 13 April 2021, Dr Benaris contacted the CQC. She did so anonymously. There is no note of what Dr Benaris reported to the CQC, either of the exact words used or the gist of her alleged disclosures. In her pleaded case she said merely

12. On 13 April 2021, the Claimant called the CQC to report her concerns regarding patient safety. She has chosen not to plead the words used or gist of information she averred she disclosed.

113. In her evidence-in-chief she told the Tribunal So great were my concerns about the second in-patient death and the number of near misses in my absence, that I felt compelled to contact the Care Quality Commission (“CQC”) anonymously on the 13 April 2021 (“PD4”). I described all the concerns relating to patient safety on Beaumont ward and was reassured that this would be explored directly with the Trust. Likewise she chose in her evidence-in-chief not to set out the information she avers she disclosed or even to provide the gist of it. As noted, we forbade an attempt in re-examination to provide evidence on the matter for the first time. Later, Dr Benaris described this disclosure as the catalyst for an adverse change in how people treated her.

114. Ms Helen Abel, a CQC inspector, emailed the Trust on 14 April 2021 setting out the issues raised in bullet point. She did not name either Dr Dyer or Dr Benaris and did not say who had raised what issue. The list is lengthy, but in cross-examination Dr Benaris identified the following bullet point as capturing her concern

• Mid December in death young man. Action not followed through. Seen by a senior. No faith in the SI process. Draft fails acidity of the ward. RA.Pt absconded — level 1 SI human factor error. 2020/18421. Garden is no longer supervised. Garden is too long, area of fence, no overhang captured her concern.

115. We consider the evidence wholly unsatisfactory. We can appreciate why there may not be a contemporaneous note. The disclosure was made by telephone and it is natural for people not to consider making a note afterwards.

116. That said, this disclosure is supposed to be a catalyst for a change in treatment. Dr Benaris has made clear it is significant. The Tribunal therefore would expect to see the information allegedly disclosed set out in the pleaded case or, at the very least, in her witness statement, particularly as the latter ran to 40 pages over 218 paragraphs. No explanation has been put before us about why what is said to be a key part of the claim is reduced in the claimant’s case to almost the status of a passing comment that tells us nothing about what information was said to have been disclosed. We do not accept that the bullet point which Dr Benaris pointed to is enough to show she made a protected disclosure to the CQC. It does not tell us what she actually said to the CQC, yet alone what information she conveyed. We cannot discern to what extent that bullet point was influenced by any concern Dr Dyer may have raised. We also reflect on the fact that she did not identify that bullet point, or at least the gist of its contents, as being the information disclosed in her pleading or evidence-in-chief. The need for caution is more acute in our view when she has chosen not to set it out at all in her evidence-in-chief despite its apparent significance.

117. We infer that the reason the contents of the alleged disclosure to the CQC is not set out in her pleading or evidence-in-chief is because she did not disclose information to them – or at least nothing capable of being a protected disclosure. If it were so important as she says we are satisfied she would have included it or, at the least, explained why she could not. Alternatively, we simply say in the absence of evidence she has not proven that she made this protected disclosure. Either way the effect is that this part of her case is not proven and there was therefore no PD4. 14 April 2021 – Finding of fact meeting between Dr Acovski and Dr Benaris re Ms Puckey’s complaint and report back to Dr Acovski.

118. Dr Vesna Acovski and Dr Benaris met for a fact-finding meeting on 14 April 2021. The notes record the following exchanges. [Dr Benaris] reflected on the incident and acknowledged that she may have been abrupt but explained this was as a direct cause of her not being aware of the sudden change about the garden and the lack of communication. MB didn’t feel she should apologise to Marie as she feels she has not done anything wrong; MB added that she finds working with Marie difficult but is happy to continue to have professional contact, although she feels that this should not be 1 to 1 basis

119. Dr Benaris’s stance is part of that theme where she suggests she has done nothing wrong and the fault lies with others. It demonstrates the lack of self- reflection that is a hallmark and came strongly across to us in cross- examination. By suggesting no 1:1 basis for contact with Ms Puckey, Dr Benaris placed an obstacle in there being an effective work environment. It leads us to conclude she was not willing to compromise to provide a supportive work environment.

120. The demanding emails refers to emails from about 9 March 2021 where Ms Puckey emails Drs Benaris, Dyer, Kumari and Vann. She explains she is trying to compile a table so staff know when the consultant will be on the ward. She addresses questions to certain doctors in the email. Vis-à-vis Dr Benaris, she wrote Dr Benaris I need you to commit to one full day either on a Tuesday or a Wednesday as having 2 afternoons is not enough time to review 12 patients. As I said above committing to times and sticking to them will help the nurses hugely.

121. In context, we conclude that it is not reasonable to read Ms Puckey’s email as demanding. Dr Benaris replied without any sign of irritation at Ms Puckey’s email which suggests she did not at the time see it that way, and it is only much later after the event she saw it as a demanding email.

122. Dr Acovski and Dr Benaris also discussed the complaint from Prof Al-Uzri. Dr Benaris said she had nothing to apologise for. Specifically, she alleged that Prof Al-Uzri called her a liar and said during the meeting that at least I do not hold my patients.

123. We do not consider resolving the dispute of what happened at that meeting would help to decide this case. However, the comment about holding patients is an example of an impression that came across in the evidence. It refers to the 2 schools of thought about treatment. It appeared common ground that some psychiatrists hold the view that a patient should be discharged from the Unit as soon as possible, because it better promotes their recovery. Others hold that a patient should remain in the Unit until recovered. We appreciate the position is more nuanced, but paraphrasing is suitable for these purposes. It is common ground that Dr Benaris is in the latter category, and Prof Al- Uzri is in the former. It seems common ground both views are medically reasonable. We express no view on that. However, the fact this appears to be such an issue now is illustrative of the dysfunction with the Unit. This disagreement and dysfunction, and intolerance towards each other came across very much in the evidence.

124. The notes also record that Dr Benaris recognised [that some staff see her as] rude and abrupt, as Ms Puckey alleged. She also recognised that she could get stressed. Later she admitted to Dr Acovski that she was abrupt. We must stress that Dr Benaris was not rude or abrupt to the Tribunal when she gave evidence. However, we can easily see based on her manner and demeanour how her behaviour could, in the more familiar setting of her workplace, be seen by others as rude and abrupt. 14 April 2021 – PD5

125. On 14 April 2021 Dr Benaris emailed Ms Angela Hillery, the Trust’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Ms Pauline Lewitt, the Trusts Freedom to Speak Up Guardian (a person nominated to receive protected disclosures). In the email she wrote (so far as we consider relevant): You will be aware that there has been another suicide on the ward (05.04.21) a day after admission. I have been raising concerns about the number of patients on the ward, the acuity, lack of medical and nursing reviews, staffing issues etc since last year. Lessons have not been learnt from the suicide of the young man in September last year. The SI report, which has still not been finalised has not identified the crux of the matter. In-patient Consultants have sent numerous emails raising our concerns and suggesting solutions, only for them to be dismissed or ignored. Sadly, we have been portrayed as a difficult consultant group and the complaints process used to intimidate some of us into silence. We need to address the issues on Beaumont urgently to prevent another death. I understand there is work planned to reduce dormitories, however, until we are able to accept admissions directly onto all wards, patient safety takes precedence. …

126. We note two matters. The first is that this disclosure is as much about attacking the conclusions of the earlier SI report we detail above. The email is as much about disagreeing with that as anything. The second is to note that at about this time Dr Benaris and others began to promote their proposal to move the Beaumont Ward from 2 consultants to 3 consultants. In context, this email is also about pushing their viewpoint.

14 April 2021 – Dr Dyer contacts the CQC

127. On 14 April 2021 Dr Dyer also contacted the CQC. He did not maintain his anonymity. There is no evidence that Dr Dyer was treated adversely as a result of making a disclosure.

14 April 2021 – CQC contacts the Trust

128. Ms Abel of the CQC contacted the trust on 14 April 2021. We refer to the communication above. We add that there were about 35 or so bullet points and that she specifically referred to staff expressing dissatisfaction about the SI investigation, environment, staff morale, and leadership. She requested feedback on the issues she identified. She said the complaints had come from 2 employees to whom she had spoken separately.

129. The Trust acknowledged this 2 days later.

16 April 2021 – Dr Acovski’s conclusions

130. Dr Acovski set out her conclusions in a relatively brief email to Dr Hiremath and Angela West on 16 April 2021.

130.1 She set out the detail of the interaction with Ms Puckey. She noted Dr Benaris was very affected by Patient 1’s death. She concluded by saying Dr Benaris found it difficult to work with Ms Puckey.
130.2 Dr Benaris had denied she had any need to apologise to Prof Al- Uzri. She noted that Dr Benaris said there were witnesses but declined to name them.

131. One point of note is that there is no note of Dr Benaris telling Dr Acovski that Prof Al-Uzri shouted at her. However, she told us that in her evidence- in-chief. We appreciate the note is not verbatim and Dr Acovski may have not recorded it for whatever reason. However, she captures the remainder of Dr Benaris’s case about this interaction with Prof Al-Uzri, it is the sort of thing one might expect Dr Acovski to think significant if it were said, this conversation took place closer to the time when matters were fresher in everyone’s memory and Dr Benaris’s evidence was not credible generally. We conclude that the reason the shouting is not mentioned is because she never said it and infer that this is because it did not happen. It tends to cast more doubt in our mind on Dr Benaris’s credibility.

20 April 2021 – First Quality Summit and outcome

132. In reply to the CQC’s enquiry, Dr Hiremath and Ms Scott arranged a series of so-called quality summits. Their purpose was to review the safety and care of patients in the Unit. Each was chaired by the Chief Nurse of Northampton Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust. The first was on 20 April 2021.

133. In the first summit they reviewed all the recent safety data, serious incidents, staffing data and infection prevention and control (IPC) data. They also held listening events with consultants, team managers and senior nursing staff. Both Dr Benaris and Dr Dyer attended. No-one knew Dr Benaris was the other whistleblower.

134. The summit disclosed the following.

134.1 Consultants favoured a change of model to revert to the original admitting model to all wards. Evidence from others did not support this view.
134.2 A breakdown in communication and positive working relationships between the different professional groups on the Beaumont ward. This needed to be addressed quickly.
134.3 There was concern about the acuity on the ward when all 22 beds were occupied. This needed a review.

135. The outcome was relayed to the CQC on 21 April 2021. Ms Scott also wrote to both Dr Benaris and Dr Dyer to thank them for their involvement. Concerns about Beaumont ward and Dr Benaris’s stress

136. There were also a series of other meetings.

137. Dr Naik and Dr Benaris spoke on 23 April 2021 about the organisation of the Beaumont Ward. Dr Naik sent an e-mail to Dr Benaris setting out a summary of their discussions. We accept the email as an accurate summary. It recorded as follows:

3. You do not feel 2 Consultants on Beaumont is workable and you have felt stretched. You proposed before today, having checked with [Dr Vann] that sharing beds with [Dr Vann] on Beaumont and Thornton [another ward], 6 and 7 respectively on these words, 13 beds in total for you and the same for [Dr Vann] would be your most preferred option. …

5. We talked about other options and your preference in this order, the way I understood

a. Share Beaumont and Thornton with Adrian as above.
b. Swap your current role (12 beds on Beaumont with [Dr Vann’s] 14 on Thornton).
c. Remain in your current position.
d. Aston [another ward]— not really to your liking. I explored further and you said you have never worked there and would not want to start something new. You did clarify that there was no other reason but wanted to know why above options, the first one particularly was not possible.
e. Move to CMHT [Community Mental Health Team].

138. This illustrates ongoing discussion that was taking place about the working arrangements on Beaumont Ward. The accuracy of the contents was not challenged. We draw from the email and conclude that that Dr Benaris herself reported feeling stretched. Taken with how she accepts others can see her as abrupt in her manner (which is consistent with someone manifesting stress), and concerns of others that she was appearing stressed, we conclude the focus of the Trust in relation to Beaumont Ward and Dr Benaris was to do what was right both for her welfare in the workplace and for the Trust.

139. These discussions also involved Dr Aria and Dr Hiremath. On 25 April 2021 Dr Aria wrote: … Mariam is the other person who has worked on the admission for many months. I explored the options with her, for her. (I will share the email I sent her summarising our discussion for your information). She wants to ideally split her current 12 beds with Adrian, 6 each and take half of his patients on Thornton. I have discussed this with Sam and Fabida and we are not keen, nurses definitely are not. This goes against what we agreed 2 months ago to go with 2 Consultant model for the ward. Also, that would mean 3 Consultants on Thornton, again not ideal and not suitable for the team and only suits the Consultants. Also it leaves us with finding cover for the remaining 10 beds on Beaumont working alongside Adrian and Mariam. Also, does it address the concerns expressed by nursing staff?? Mariam also suggested she swap with Adrian. Again this could work but we need to consider the following. Adrian has not been supportive of the admission ward model, he has concerns about it. I do not know what his views are at this time.

140. 2 days later she wrote: I have been thinking on this all day. [Dr Kumari] is still off and can’t therefore be considered. She has cancelled her meeting with Angela and me tomorrow. Mariam needs a break. Adrian can do half though prefers to do quarter with Mariam. We need two doctors who can provide leadership and are committed to support the team in the best way, until we no longer need the current arrangement. …

141. On 29 April 2021 Dr Benaris and Dr Vann met Dr Naik and Dr Aria. The result of the above was that on 30 April 2021 Dr Naik confirmed to all that Dr Benaris would continue to work on the Beaumont Ward, as she had wished, and Dr Naik would take over as the other consultant.

142. We find as a fact that the concerns held by Dr Naik and others for Dr Benaris’s welfare were genuine concerns and the focus was on her wellbeing and nothing more. Beaumont Ward was an intense working environment. We consider that Dr Benaris’s own admitted behaviour of being abrupt, and her concession that she could come across like that would be demonstrative of an adverse reaction to stress. This is consistent with what was a stressful workplace. We think it reasonable and plausible for Dr Aria to conclude she needed a break. We note however they respected her wish to continue to work on the ward, albeit they did not accept the recommendation from Dr Vann and her for the 3-consultant model. We cannot comment on which model would have been better but note the concerns about the 3-consultant model. We do not consider there is anything that shows they were artificial objections to the model. The key takeaway is the Trust accommodated Dr Benaris’s wish to keep working on the Beaumont Ward. We also see nothing that suggests any disclosures played a role on this process. None of this suggests there was any pressure on Dr Benaris to move, yet alone intense pressure. We find as a fact there was no pressure on Dr Benaris to move.

26 April 2021 – Feedback from quality summit meeting

143. On 26 April 2021 Dr Scott and Dr Hiremath wrote to Dr Dyer and Dr Benaris as follows. Dear Dr Dyer and Dr Benaris Thank you for attending the Beaumont Ward Quality Summit last Tuesday and openly and honestly sharing your thoughts on what you feel is going well and what you feel, as a team, we should focus future quality improvements. Your contribution to this event was very much appreciated and valued. We are in the process of thematically analysing the information we gathered at this event and we plan to further meet with you to share our findings in the very near future. We accept this email reflected Dr Scott and Dr Hiremath’s genuine and personal views, and those of the Trust generally.

28 April 2021 – Dr Naik expresses concerns about Dr Benaris

144. On 29 April 2021 Dr Naik wrote to Dr Benaris, as follows. Fabida and I have been open about our concerns for you and the stress you have shared with us about working in the admission ward for many months now. We were very keen for you to have a break 2 months ago. You were generous in offering to continue in the absence of other offers and also due to your preference at that time. We want to reiterate our concerns for you and our preference is still for you to take a break from Beaumont. Let's talk tomorrow.

145. The meeting took place at 2pm the next day. Dr Benaris characterised it as Dr Naik took no account of her wishes and he was unable to explain why he maintained a 2-consultant model despite her proposal for a split role. She says she was concerned when Dr Naik said he would take on the role as consultant alongside her because of his “close tie” to Ms Puckey. She cited Dr Vann as a witness.