JUDGMENT

1. The Claimants claims for equal pay brought through Section of the Equality Act 2010 are dismissed upon withdrawal by the Claimants

2. The Claimants claims brought through Section 44 and 48 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 are not well founded and are dismissed.

3. The Claimants claims brought through Section 47B and 48 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 are not well founded and are dismissed.

REASONS

1. The Respondent is a large company which provides, amongst other things,

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

facilities management services. In 2021 it took over responsibility for the provision of security services at the Westfield Shopping Centre in Stratford, East London. The Claimants all worked as security guards at the shopping centre.

2. The claims dealt with within this judgment were brought by all four Claimants as a ‘multiple’ and included an equal pay claim. That claim was withdrawn at the outset of the hearing. The claims that remain and which are dealt with within this judgment arise from two collective grievances in which the claimants were concerned and which they say amounted to protected disclosures and/or acts falling within section 44 of the Employment Rights Act 1996. The Claimants say that in retaliation for raising their grievances the Respondent has subjected them to several detriments.

Essential Procedural History

3. In order to understand the extent of the claims that have been brought it is necessary to briefly set out the procedural history. I record that during the hearing all parties proceeded on the basis that the scope of the claims was accurately set out in the case management order drawn up following a hearing on 11 July 2025 before Regional Employment Judge Burgher.

4. The Claimants ET1 was lodged on 20 March 2023 by Mr Lancaster who identified that the claim was a multiple and named the other three Claimants on the claim form. Whilst the ET1 identified the nature of the claims as being an equal pay claim and a claim of relying on whistleblowing concerning health and safety concerns no particulars of the detriments said to have been suffered were set out. The ET1 named both Mitie Group plc and Unabail-Rodamco- Westfield as respondents. Unabail-Rodamco-Westfield is the owner of the shopping centre. The claim against that entity was rejected because the Claimants had not obtained an ACAS early conciliation certificate naming that company. The Claimants sought to bring further claims against Unabail- Rodamco-Westfield and also Westfield Europe Limited but they were later struck out as having no reasonable prospect of success.

5. At a preliminary hearing that took place on 18 July 2023 before EJ Mack the Claimants were ordered to provide further and better particulars of their claims. It had been intended that those particulars would include details of any detriments said to have been suffered by the Claimants as a consequence of anything raised in the grievances. It took two further case management hearings one before EJ Byrne and one before EJ Jones before the list of issues started to take shape. However, there were still issues which had not been clarified.

6. A fourth preliminary hearing took place on 10 March 2025. That hearing had been listed to deal with an application by the Respondent to strike out the equal pay claim. That was heard by EJ Lewis who declined to either strike out the claim or make a deposit order. She was unable to deal with other issues due to a lack of time and directed Mr Haque and Mr Benpah to set out their claims on the detriments they were said to have suffered.

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

7. A fifth preliminary hearing took place on 17 June 2025 before EJ Gordon Walker. That hearing was intended to deal with applications by the Claimants to strike out the Response and applications by the Respondent to strike out parts of the claim. It appears that a pragmatic approach was taken and EJ Gordon Walker dealt with finalising the list of issues and an application by the Claimants to rely upon additional protected disclosures and further detriments. She recorded her decisions in respect of the applications to amend within her orders at paragraphs 9 and 10 of the case management order and set out a list of issues which incorporated those decisions as a schedule to her order.

8. At that stage, the final hearing had been listed for 15 days commencing on 18 July 2025. Due to a lack of judicial resources the Tribunal notified the parties that the final hearing would need to be postponed. On an application by the Respondent the matter was listed for a preliminary hearing before Regional Employment Judge Burgher on 11 July 2025. He was persuaded that the case could be completed within 11 days and he had identified me as being available to conduct the hearing. Regional Employment Judge Burgher drew up a final list of issues. He indicated his view that the equal pay claim had little reasonable prospect of success saying that, had there been time to do so he would have made a deposit order. He encouraged the Claimants to reflect on whether that claim should be withdrawn. As I have indicated above the Claimants decided to withdraw that claim doing so by email. I confirmed their intentions at the outset of the hearing.

9. I proceeded on the basis that the list of issues drawn up by Regional Employment Judge Burgher set out the entirety of the claims that I needed to adjudicate upon save that the Equal Pay claim have been withdrawn by the Claimants.

The hearing

10. In advance of the hearing the Respondent had sought permission for Victoria Winslade to give evidence via video link. Regional Employment Judge Burgher had directed that any such application needed to be supported by medical evidence. I was provided with a brief note from Victoria Winslade’s general practitioner. That email suggested that it would be detrimental to Victoria Winslade to give evidence in the presence of the Claimants. In emails sent on the morning of the hearing Mr Lawal and Mr Haque both asked to give evidence via video. Mr Lawal relied upon medical records within the bundle that suggested he suffered from anxiety. Mr Haque told me that he had been diagnosed with PTSD. I decided that there was minimal prejudice in granting the applications made in respect of all witnesses and that whether fully supported by medical evidence or not each witness would be able to give better evidence via video than in the presence of each other. I could not see any prejudice to the opposing party in allowing them to do so. During the hearing a further application was made by the Respondent to allow Mr Bland to give evidence by video. The basis of this was essentially to allow him to care for his children rather than travel to the Tribunal centre. At this juncture there was no opposition to this application and I permitted it.

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

11. My only concern about permitting Mr Lawal and Mr Haque to give evidence remotely was the time that might be wasted if they had to travel between their homes and the Tribunal centre in order to use the video link. I proposed a solution to that by offering the possibility of setting up a further tribunal room where they could give evidence by video link. They both indicated that that was a suitable solution which saved a great deal of tribunal time while still accommodating their needs.

12. The parties had exchanged written witness statements and had provided me with two electronic bundles. The first had a file name of Final Hearing bundle the electronic version had 2144 pages to which for additional pages were added without objection. There was a further bundle with the file name Disputed Documents Bundle which had 1677 pages. It is unnecessary for me to comment on why there had been a need for two bundles.

13. In advance of the hearing Mr Lawal and Mr Haque had prepared some submissions which I read before hearing any evidence. After dealing with these preliminary matters I took the morning to read the witness statements and documents referred to within them having indicated to the parties that I would probably be ready to hear evidence at 14:00. In fact my reading took a little bit longer than that and I started hearing evidence shortly afterwards.

14. I heard from the following witnesses:

14.1 Mr Bempah, he was employed as a security guard at the time that these claims arose. He told me that he has subsequently been dismissed by the Respondent but that is not a matter that he complains of in these proceedings. He had provided a witness statement which was drafted whilst the equal pay claim was live and much of his statement dealt with that issue however in his oral evidence he was able to describe his involvement with the two collective grievances and expressed his dissatisfaction at the outcome.
14.2 Mr Lawal’s witness statement dealt with the issue of equal pay but provided more detail of his involvement in grievances which were raised in May and November 2022. He then dealt with the treatment which he complains about in these proceedings.
14.3 Mr Haque’s witness statement included passages identical to his colleagues when dealing with the equal pay claim. He was not employed at the time of the first collective grievance in May 2022 but suggested that he had had some part in compiling a document that was presented in the course of the second collective grievance. He dealt only briefly with his complaints about the grievance process and outcome.
14.4 Mr Lancaster is a security guard and remains employed by the Respondent. His witness statement, in common with his colleagues, deals with issues of equal pay before turning to his involvement with the two collective grievances. He then deals with an incident that took place in February 2023 between himself and Victoria Winslade which, Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others together with the subsequent disciplinary investigation, he says amounted to a detriment for raising the grievances.
14.5 Victoria Winslade was at the material time employed as the Training and Guest Experience Manager. She worked for the respondent between April 2022 and August 2023. She is said by Mr Lawal and Mr Lancaster to be one of the people who subjected them to detriments raising their grievances. She says in her witness statement that her difficulties in managing the claimants was a significant factor in her decision to leave her job.
14.6 Shozadul Islam was a Security Team Manager at the time of the events giving rise to this claim. In that position he was the direct line manager of the claimants. He is the person said by Mr Lawal to have been responsible for not allocating him shifts for a period after 25 November 2022. Mr Lawal says that Mr Islam continued to allocate him ‘keys duties’ after it became known that he had difficulty undertaking those duties because of a bad back.
14.7 Ian Martin worked for the Respondent between October 2021 and February 2024 as the Security Operations Manager. He was the person who heard the first and second collective grievances in 2022. Both Mr Haque and Mr Bempah complained that the outcome of those grievances amounted to a detriment.
14.8 Adeil Qammar has been employed by the Respondent since January 2012. In 2022 he was employed as a CCTV manager before being promoted initially to a role as an acting Security Team Manager before being appointed to that substantive role at the end of 2022 or the beginning of 2023. He was involved in the decision to remove shifts from Mr Lawal in November 2022. He was also said to be involved in allocating Mr Lawal duties involving keys after learning of Mr Lawal’s back issues. Finally he was one of the individuals who spoke to Mr Lawal about wearing a hat inside the shopping centre.
14.9 Robert Nicholas has worked for the Respondent since August 2021 and before that with Securitas who had held the contract previously. He was at the time the Senior Security Team Manager. He was involved in an email exchange with Mr Lawal in May and June 2023 concerning training. Mr Lawal complained that in his correspondence with other managers Mr Nicholas spoke about him in a way that he regards as derogatory. Mr Nicholas also dealt with his involvement in hearing a grievance brought by Mr Lawal against Mr Qammar relating to the decision to remove Mr Lawal from his shifts in November 2022 and his conduct of a return-to-work meeting in February 2023. Finally he had some involvement in discussions about Mr Lawall’s headwear.
14.10 Christopher Badr-Safdari at the time was a Security Team Manager. He was involved in investigating the incident that took place between Mrs Winslade and Mr Lancaster in February 2023. He ultimately decided that there was no disciplinary case to answer but Mr Lancaster Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others complains about the amount of time he took to complete the investigation. He was also able to comment on Mr Lawal’s allegation that he was denied training opportunities. He cancelled two shifts that had been allocated to Mr Lawal in February 2023. His evidence dealt with the reasons for that
14.11 Finally I heard from Edward Bland who at the time was the Account Director responsible for Westfield Stratford as well as a number of other accounts. He was the person that heard the appeal in the second collective grievance that started in November 2022. His witness statement deals mainly with the issue of equal pay but goes on to deal with his involvement in that appeal. In addition he had some involvement in the decision that Mr Lawal would not be given paid leave for attending a trade union course. Mr Lawal says that comments that Mr Bland made before he was allocated the role of hearing the grievance appeal were derogatory and amounted to a detriment. My findings of fact

15. Below I shall set out my findings of fact on the evidence that was presented to me. Where there is a conflict of evidence I must decide which version of events is more likely. In this section I shall deal predominantly with the question of what happened. I will go on to make further findings of fact about the reasons for any treatment in the section below headed discussions and conclusions.

16. I do not intend to set out the entirety of the evidence that I heard. I was presented with a vast number of documents. I was not referred to many documents at all. Part of the reason for this was that the bundles included documents said to be relevant to the question of equal pay. In making these findings of fact I have read all the documents referred to in the evidence. That includes the documents listed in the back of each of the Claimants witness statements including many relevant only to the withdrawn equal pay claim. I have not read the bundles in their entirety because I was not asked to do so.

17. Before I deal with the events that took place I shall make some general comments about the witnesses. This is a case where I consider that every witness who appeared in front of me had decided in entrenched terms which side they were on. With no exceptions I found the witnesses to be partisan and very defensive. At one point in his evidence, with a great deal of frankness and insight, Mr Bempah recognised that he was becoming defensive. That was true of almost every witness to some degree or other. Such high feelings are not unusual in litigation but taking such a partisan approach makes it very difficult to place any real confidence in the account of events that is given. I give some examples when dealing with factual disputes below.

The TUPE Transfer

18. The Westfields shopping centre at Stratford is operated by Unibail-Rodamco- Westfield Group. It contracts out the provision of security services. The is more than one security provider. There is a general provider and a provider of security services for events. Up to 1 August 2021 the general security contract

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

was held by Securitas. The contract for events was held, in part at least, by McKenzie Arnold Group Limited.

19. On 1 August 2021 the Respondent took over responsibility for the provision of services formally provided by Securitas. All the Claimants, with the exception of Mr Haque, had been employed by Securitas and continued to work after the transfer for the Respondent.

The Respondent’s grievance policy

20. The Respondent had a grievance policy. I find that policy is well written and clear. It broadly follows the guidance provided by ACAS in the ACAS Code of Practice on Discipline and Grievances at work. It suggests that the first stage of any complaint should be to try and raise the grievance informally with a manager. The policy recognises that that will not be appropriate in every case. If the grievance cannot be resolved informally then the policy says as follows: ‘You’ll need to put your grievance in writing and give as much information as possible including, (cid:127) Full details about your complaint or issue and any relevant facts (cid:127) The dates when incidents occurred and names of all the people involved if applicable

(cid:127) What you’d like the outcome or solution to be

You’ll then need to send your written grievance to your manager or, if this isn’t appropriate, the ER team.’

21. On 27 April 2022 Mr Lawal sent an email to Mr Martin with the subject line ‘Request for a formal Grievance Meeting’. In the body of his email he said that he was writing to raise a formal grievance. In the two paragraphs that follow he referred to the fact that he considered that he was not receiving equal pay. A pay rise issue that was perceived to be ‘unethical’. In the second paragraph he made the suggestion that the Security Officers had been told in one-to-one meetings by Mr Adam Rallings, the Senior Operations Manager of Retail and Shopping Centre that they would be given a job retention bonus for staying with Mitie and that no such bonus had been paid.

22. In his email Mr Lawal asked for a response within 14 days and indicated that he would wish to be accompanied at a grievance meeting by 2 to 3 work colleagues. Mr Lawal signed off his email on behalf of himself ‘and various security officers at Strathfield Westfield’.

23. At the same time as he was asking for a meeting to discuss those grievances Mr Lawal was involved in organising a petition. At the point when the grievance meeting was held 27 security officers and CCTV operators employed by the Respondent had signed the petition. The signatures included Mr Lawal and Mr Bempah but not Mr Lancaster or Mr Haque (who was not yet employed by the Respondent). In the end some 57 security officers had done so. The heading on the petition was:

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

‘Petition on behalf of Security and CCTV operators employed by Mitie Group plc at Stratford job retention bonus and improved work conditions.’

24. One issue that I need to resolve in respect of the petition was whether it was signed by Mr Qammar. Mr Qammar, at the time the petition was prepared, was a CCTV operator. On its face the petition includes a printed name of Adeil Qammer and a signature. When Mr Qammar gave evidence and was asked questions by Mr Lawal he was taken to the petition and initially said that he ‘recognised’ the signature. However, he went on to say that he had not signed the petition and had never seen it at the time. Mr Lawal put it to him that he had signed the petition and that his reasons for now denying he had done so were that he had taken the side of management following his promotions. Mr Qammar denied that was the case.

25. I am not a handwriting expert and I should not place great weight on the fact that the signature on the petition bears more than a passing resemblance to that on Mr Qammar’s witness statement. If Mr Qammar is right and that the signature is not his then it means that somebody else has quite consciously used his name in order to bolster the strength of the petition. The petition was presented to Ian Martin who worked in the same building as the security officers and CCTV operators. Presenting a false petition would be an incredibly risky thing to do given how easy it would have been to check that all the signatures were genuine. It would also be thoroughly dishonest. I have come to the conclusion that it is more likely than not that Mr Qammar did indeed sign the petition as Mr Lawal put to him. I also find that his motivation in denying that he did so was the fact that he has now taken the side of management. His refusal to acknowledge that he had in some respect sympathized with the position taken in the first collective grievance is an example of the entrenched thinking that I have referred to above.

26. The Respondent has a dedicated Human Resources Department. The record keeping of that department’s interactions with the Respondent’s managers operates through a system of a ‘ticket’ being raised. It was suggested by Mr Lawal that the managers would raise a ticket when a grievance was submitted but that the outcome of the grievance was decided by the HR Department with or without the input of more senior managers. There was no evidence to support the suggestion that the outcomes of the grievances I heard about were determined by HR. I find that the HR Department’s involvement in a grievance or disciplinary matter was limited to giving advice as to the process that needed to be followed as opposed to making any decisions. The assistance however would include drafting correspondence on occasions. An example of this is where a grievance outcome was decided upon and the manager would record his or her decision on the ticket system which would then be picked up by the HR Department and a formal outcome prepared. That needed to be signed off by the decision-making manager.

27. The Respondent’s grievance policy sets out guidance as to how a collective grievance might be raised or dealt with. It suggests that where more than one person has the same concern this might be dealt with as a collective grievance. It goes on to say that the employee will be asked whether they want their grievances to be dealt with on a collective basis. If they do then the suggestion

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

is that a spokesperson should be appointed by the group to represent the whole group at the grievance hearing and any subsequent appeal. It suggests that whilst it is possible that the whole group might be invited to a meeting that would depend on the nature of the grievance. The ordinary process would be that the spokesperson would be invited to the grievance hearing and they would be expected to liaise with the wider group.

28. On 17 May 2022 Mr Martin sent an email to Mr Lawal informing him that he was looking to arrange a formal grievance hearing. He asked which colleagues were involved in the grievance. He went on to say that either everybody could be present or that they could agree amongst themselves to appoint one person to attend and act as a spokesman. That email was broadly in accordance with the policy although it takes a generous view about who might wish to attend the meeting. On 18 May 2022 Mr Lawal responded saying that he, Kadir, Mr Lancaster and Ali. Would wish to attend the meeting.

29. On 24 May 2022 Mr Lawal sent further details of the grievance to Mr Martin in a document. Under a heading ‘issues unhappy with’ were the following six bullet points:  ‘Unpaid Job retention/Christmas bonus?  Not received Pay rise as promised  Not on a salary that reflects the current job role and current climate  Night shift rate should be higher than day shift rate  Work Conditions/ Pay structure  A range of other factors to be elaborated in the formal Grievance Meeting’

30. The grievance meeting took place on 26 May 2022. The hearing was conducted by Mr Martin and Mrs Winslade attended to take notes. It is the practice of the Respondent, which was followed in every meeting that I heard about, that there was a notetaker who would produce non-verbatim summaries of what was discussed in the meeting. Once prepared those summaries would be sent to the employees concerned and they were invited to make any corrections or additions. As such I can have considerable confidence, where a matter is recorded within the notes, it contains a summary of what was discussed. I can be further confident that if the notes do not record some important matter then it is unlikely to have been raised during the meeting as, had it been raised, the omission would have been corrected when the notes were sent to the employees. That said, the notes do not purport to be anything more than a summary of the discussions.

31. Mr Lawal, Mr Bempah and Mr Lancaster attended the meeting on 26 May 2022 together with two further colleagues. One colleague, Kadir, who had been expected to attend did not but the others confirmed that they spoke on his behalf. Mr Martin took no objection during the meeting to the fact that the employees who had attended differed from the list that had been expected or that the numbers had increased. In his evidence he said that he had made an exception for the employees. I accept that evidence and find that he found it rather unsatisfactory having to deal with numerous voices in the meeting.

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

32. At the outset of the meeting the employees summarised their concerns as follows:

32.1 they complained that they had not been paid a job retention bonus which they said that they had been promised; and
32.2 they complained that they were not paid at the same rate as security guards doing the same work at Westfield in west London having been promised that they would be given back pay.
32.3 They then indicated that they thought that their current rate of pay did not reflect their job roles, duties and key responsibilities when taking into account the higher rate of inflation prevalent at the time.
32.4 They suggested that the pay rate for a night shift should be higher than that for a day shift.
32.5 They complained that the Respondent had altered the system operated by Securitas whereby they were paid at the end of every month and had instead paid them on a four weekly cycle.
32.6 They suggested that the working conditions placed them at risk and under pressure.
32.7 They suggested that they should be paid a higher rate of pay for overtime.
32.8 They complained about the amount of holiday they were given suggesting it did not reflect the hours of work.
32.9 The notes record them saying: ‘standards are lower but all on the same pay rate. Inadequate training’.

33. It is clear from the notes that followed that training was the first issue that was discussed after the introduction. The notes record Mr Martin informing the employees that the Respondent valued the feedback on training but suggested that individual issues were raised with the Security Team Managers. He went on to say that the Respondent was continuously reviewing training delivery. The Claimants suggested to Mrs Winslade that given that she was responsible for delivering training it was inevitable that she would feel that their description of the training as inadequate would be a criticism of her personally causing her offence. Mrs Winslade said that this meeting had taken place within months of her starting her new role. She said that in her view it takes years in order to put a robust training plan in place. She said that she would not be in the least concerned that the employees regarded the training at that point as inadequate. I do not consider that anything that is recorded in the notes of the meeting or indeed anything said in the evidence reflected badly upon the efforts made by Mrs Winslade to organise a training program. The Claimants did not give any example of any personal failure. I accept Mrs Winslade’s evidence that she was broadly in agreement with the issues raised by the Claimants and took no offence at this being raised. That is consistent with Mr Martin indicating

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

that he valued the feedback that was given.

34. One area where the notes record Mr Martin pushing back is that the employees complained that they were expected to train others. He is recorded as saying that was correct and that it was a reasonable expectation for established employees to mentor new employees. At the conclusion of that particular discussion Mr Martin is recorded as saying that the Respondent was reviewing and updating the training but accepted that there was a need for better communication.

35. The notes record that at that stage Mr Lawal suggested that the purpose of the meeting was to discuss the pay rise. He suggested that morale was low and that some officers were struggling financially. That led to a discussion about the rate of pay. Mr Martin is recorded as telling the employees that a pay rise had been confirmed that would be backdated to November 2021 for Security Officers. He explained that there had been a delay because it required a variation to the contract between the Respondent and Westfield. The response of the security officers was to say that they had been hearing the same for many months.

36. The employees then went on to say that they believed that they should be paid £15 an hour instead of the £12.20 that had been offered. They sought to justify that by reference to the shortage of staff, success in dealing with the police and the high footfall at Westfield Stratford in comparison to Westfield London. In seeking to justify a pay increase there was reference to the high crime rate in Newham and reference to stabbings, shootings and other violent crimes.

37. The discussion then moved onto the practice of paying wages every four weeks. The employees expressed their dissatisfaction with that and suggested that it meant: ‘monthly wage officers have to work with not adequate rest leading to burnout, irritable behaviour and a high turnover of staff’. I asked the Claimants to explain to me why being paid every four weeks involved Security Officers having to work without adequate rest. The explanation that was given, mainly by Mr Lawal, was that there were fewer working days before any cutoff date for pay. That is probably correct but I struggle to understand why being paid more regularly meant that officers had to work more to generate the same amount of pay. I do understand that being paid on a four weekly cycle might be inconvenient to anyone who had set up monthly direct debits. I accept that the system of being paid every four weeks was unpopular. Shortly after the grievance was brought the Respondent reverted to paying employees monthly.

38. After a lengthy discussion about low morale caused by pay the discussion turned to the issue of the retention bonus. The employees accepted that they had been paid a bonus but believe that to have been a Christmas bonus which they had always received. Mr Martin is recorded as telling the employees that the bonus that they had been paid had been stipulated by Westfield as a retention bonus although he accepted that in previous years it had always been paid at Christmas and was regarded as a Christmas bonus. In short he told the employees that they had been paid what had been promised. I find that the issue was raised by the employees because they genuinely believed that they had been promised something in addition to the ordinary Christmas bonus. I

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

conclude that the Respondent did not intend to convey that impression but, through poor communication, left the employees with the impression that they had not received what they had been promised. The employees pressed for some form of compensation and Mr Martin agreed to go away and investigate the matter having taken some advice.

39. Towards the end of the meeting Mr Lawal summed up the position taken by the employees and raised a number of points. All points related to pay in some form or other.

40. Mr Martin sent final outcome letters to all of the participants in the collective grievance on 6 July 2022. The grievance outcome letter included informing the employees that if they wish to appeal they could do so and that the appeal would be heard by Mr Bland.

41. The structure of the grievance outcome letter followed the bullet points raised by the employees in advance of the meeting. Mr Martin recorded the following conclusions:

41.1 in respect of the job retention/Christmas bonus he held that the bonus that was paid was all that was due. He accepted that many of the employees believed that something more had been promised. He partially upheld the grievance but only because he formed the view that the communication could have been clearer and set out in writing. His outcome letter sets out the fact that there were now engagement forums in order to address these matters before ‘any conclusions became entrenched’.
41.2 He then turned to the complaint that the promised pay rise had not been implemented. He informed the employees that the contract variation that was necessary had been completed and that they could expect the pay rise to be made with a backdated lump sum. He partially upheld the grievance noting that there had been a disparity in pay between the two Westfield sites in London which had subsequently been resolved.
41.3 He then turned to the issue of payment every four weeks. He informed the employees that a decision had been taken to move back to monthly payment and would shortly be implemented. On that basis he partially upheld the grievance.
41.4 Mr Martin did not accept the suggestion by the Security Officers that they should be paid £15 an hour. He pointed out that they had recently received a 6.8% pay rise but accepted that this did not withstand the current cost of living crisis. He said that the rate of pay was essentially beyond the Respondent’s control because they worked within the parameters of the contract agreed with Westfield. He did not accept the employees’ arguments that they were expected to undertake additional duties save that they had been expected to take on more training and mentoring than in the past. He suggested that in future volunteers might be sought for these duties as developmental opportunities. Overall he did not uphold any part of the grievance relating to a pay rise. Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others
41.5 The grievance in respect of revised rates for night duties and overtime shifts was not upheld. Mr Martin suggested that the matters raised by the employees could be considered in any future pay reviews.
41.6 The final point dealt with in the outcome letter referred to the petition which Mr Martin described as being ‘for pay, bonus and conditions’. He then set out a number of bullet points. He records that Mr Lawal had, on 16 June 2022, sent him an updated version of the petition which now had 57 names on it. In his covering e-mail Mr Lawal referred to the proposal to raise pay to £15 per hour before referring to: ‘Work conditions included [sic]: change to pay structure/date, new uniform and other issues discussed in the grievance meeting on the 26.5.22’. Mr Martin in his outcome letter said that a bulk purchase of uniform had been received in early June and had been distributed. He then went on to deal with some issues which he says in his outcome letter referred to comments made ‘in person’. I find that he is referring to matters which were raised in the meeting but not fully captured in the notes. He refers to 4 issues raised by the employees in respect of their rest facilities. It is clear that the employees had raised questions about plumbing issues in the male toilets and the furnishing in the rest area. He informed the employees that a proposal had been made for new security team accommodation.
41.7 He ends his outcome letter by reminding the employees that monthly engagement forums had been established for the purposes of raising discussing and addressing issues practically and collaboratively.

42. In dealing with the petition within his outcome letter Mr Martin refers to the petition being presented with a ‘vague and broad reaching statement header’. Mr Lawal and the other Claimants categorise this as being dismissive. I consider that the heading of the petition is undoubtably vague it does not set out any details about what changes to terms and conditions it supports. I find that the use of this language within the grievance outcome letter is simply factual and that it was intended as an explanation for the fact that as Mr Martin goes on to say ‘clarity was sought as the demands being petitioned for’.

43. The employees did not seek to appeal the decisions that were taken by Mr Martin. The pay rise that had been promised was eventually confirmed by a letter to the employees on 17 June 2022. As I have previously indicated the pay period was changed to monthly payments.

Events between the first and second grievances

44. On 18 May 2022 there had been an incident at work where Mr Lawal had had a disagreement with a colleague. That led to the instigation of disciplinary proceedings which were concluded at a hearing conducted by Mrs Winslade on 20 July 2022. She recorded in her outcome letter that Mr Lawal had displayed unprofessional behaviour within the workplace using language that could be identified as threatening. In her written evidence she said that Mr Lawal had a disagreement with a colleague and suggested that the matter was taken ‘outside’. She gave Mr Lawal a first written warning having taken into

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

account Mr Lawal’s honesty throughout the disciplinary proceedings. Mr Lawal does not suggest that these actions were taken as retaliation for any disclosures that he might have been involved in. I find that he has accepted that on this occasion he did not behave as well as he might have done.

45. Mr Haque started his employment as a Security Officer on 20 October 2022.

Mr Lawal’s issues with his back

46. On 17 November 2022 Mr Lawal sent an email to Mr Islam in which he said: ‘Due to constant back pains from lifting barriers and bending over to put on escalators I would like to be excused from lifting barriers and putting on escalators starting from today effectively. I have tried to work through the pain and I wanted to assist Westfield shopping centre and my colleagues but sadly my back can’t take anymore. I can get a doctors note if it is required also? Can STMs and the control room team be briefed and informed about this situation?’

47. Mr Islam was not at work on the 17 November 2022. For that reason he did not respond to Mr Lawal’s email. Mr Lawal says in his witness statement that he notified an individual called Emmanual Kamara that he had suffered a back strain injury at work. That suggestion had not been trailed in the ET1 and was not directly relevant to the issues I need to determine. However, I am satisfied that Mr Lawal did draw attention to his back pain. I am further satisfied that he was not required to do the duties that he had identified. I reach that conclusion because, when he raised a grievance about being removed from his shifts, he referred to it having been possible for him to have continued working with the reasonable adjustments that were initially put in place.

48. Mr Lawal later suggested that there had been a failure to record a workplace accident. I am not surprised that, given what Mr Lawal wrote in his email, it was not recognised that he was suggesting that he had had an accident at work as opposed to finding tasks difficult because he had a bad back. There is clearly a distinction between work tasks becoming difficult because of a bad back and having an ‘accident’.

49. On 21 November 2022 Mr Lawal sent a further email to Mr Islam which was copied into the Duty Security Managers inbox. In that email he said: ‘Effectively as of now I will not be able to do things that compromises [sic] my back pain such as lifting, pushing, or moving any sort of barriers, closing, unlocking, locking, or opening of any doors such as m1-m2…. or any door of that nature’. He went on to security team managers and control room operatives could be briefed on the matter and that his difficulties be reflected in the deployment/allocation sheets. In a somewhat litigious style he signed off that email adding the words ‘All-Rights-Reserved’ at the foot of the email.

50. Mr Lawal’s e-mail of 21 November 2022 prompted a response from Mr

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

Qammar who simply asked him to send across ‘the doctors note’. I find that he had understood from Mr Lawal’s first email that he was going to obtain a medical certificate. Mr Lawal did not respond at all.

51. On 25 November 2022 Mr Qammar spoke to Mr Lawal and informed him that he was going to be stood down from his shifts. Neither Mr Lawal nor Mr Qammar have told me very much about the conversation. I infer that the reason that was given to Mr Lawal was that it was thought that he was unfit to carry out his duties and that he should not carry out work without a medical certificate.

52. On 29 November 2022 Mr Qammar sent a further email. He asked Mr Lawal whether he was feeling better. He went on to say, ‘Did you manage to get a sick note from the doctors? If so can you please forward this to me’.

53. On 6 December 2022 Mr Lawal sent an email to a number of individuals including Mrs Winslade in which he questioned the legality of the decision to stand him down from four shifts which he had anticipated doing. The subject line of the email was ‘Breach of Contract and Withheld of[sic] wages’. Mrs Winslade responded on the same day. She said that ‘given the serious nature of your condition’ that Mr Qammar had asked that he attend his GP. She referred to having a duty of care and the fact that the role of a security officer had a high likelihood of conflict resolution. She said that ‘we do not wish to place you in a higher risk of worsening this’.

The Second Collective Grievance

54. On 17 November 2022 Mr Lawal sent an email to Mr Martin together with a number of other individuals including Mrs Winslade, Mr Bempah, Mr Lancaster and a trade union official from the GMB. The subject line of the email was: ‘Issues Regarding Pay and Work related Issues’. In the body of the email Mr Lawal simply stated that the Security Officers wanted to have a formal meeting ‘to discuss issues regarding pay and other work-related issues’. He went on to say a small number of security officers would be attending the meeting to discuss the issues brought up by their fellow officers. No details of what the grievance might entail are given in that email. The context was that the first collective grievance which also concerned pay and terms and conditions had been concluded in July 2022.

55. Mr Martin replied to Mr Lawal and his colleagues on the same day. His emails started with the sentence: ‘I particularly appreciate the challenges of the ongoing economic climate but also recognise we have been over these subjects previously; we cannot continue a perpetual cycle of going over old ground’. Mr Martin goes on to set out what he regarded as progress in dealing with issues raised by employees. He suggested that matters could best be dealt with if they were initially raised with the Security Team Managers. Mr Lawal suggested that this was a dismissive approach. I disagree. I consider that it is entirely understandable that given the absence of any detail in the email sent by Mr Lawal it was assumed that the reference to ‘pay and other work-related issues’ would cover the same ground as had been discussed within the first collective grievance.

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

56. Mr Lawal clearly understood that Mr Martin thought that he was referring back to issues that have been discussed within the first collective grievance. He replied to Mr Martin and said this: ‘Thanks for replying to the previous email. Your response has been noted, however the issues are new issues and concerns that we did not discuss in the previous grievance meeting and can only be dealt with by Senior management of Mitie’. Mr Lawal did not go on to explain what new grievances he was raising. It would have been fairly straightforward for him to have done so. Mr Lawal tried to suggest that he needed to speak to other security officers before he could set out what the grievance was about. I do not agree. If he did not know what the actual grievances were he could, and should, have waited until he did.

57. Mr Martin sent an e-mail on 18 November 2022 in which he asked Mr Lawal what the ‘pay and work related issues’ were. Mr Lawal responded at 11:22 on the same day. He simply repeated that the security officers wanted to discuss pay and numerous work related issues. He said that those could be elaborated upon at the grievance meeting. Again he included the phrase ‘all rights reserved’ under his sign off. Mr Martin responded having copied in passages from the grievance policy and in particular the section setting out that it was necessary for an employee bringing a grievance to give details of what it is all about. This prompted a further e-mail from the Claimant. He said: ‘As this is a Collective Grievance I can not provide any more information in regards to the matter you have asked for until the Grievance meeting commences, where other Security officers can raise their issues and concerns collectively’. He went on to suggest that this was what had occurred during the first collective grievance.

58. Ian Martin sent a further e-mail on 18 November 2022. He stated that the first collective grievance meeting had taken place with a list of specific points that were discussed and a list of attendees. He acknowledged that further points were raised in the grievance but said that these were discussed ‘in the spirit of supporting progression’. He asked Mr Lawal to provide the information he had requested about the grievance.

59. On 20 November 2022 Mr Lawal sent Mr Martin an e-mail. He identified 6 potential attendees including Mr Lancaster and Mr Benpah. He then said that the grievance was regarding:  ‘dispute and unhappy over pay and working conditions set by Mitie  dispute over terms of employment and workplace rules set by Mitie  dispute with roles and duties asked to do as part of our job  disputing and unhappy about workload  Dispute and unhappy about health and safety measures Security Officers believe they have been exploited by Mitie and possibly URW in various different ways and are unhappy about the current pay rate.’

60. I find that despite Mr Martin asking for details of the grievance this e-mail still gave only the vaguest details of what might be discussed. The evidence before me did not suggest that there had been any real effort to raise any concerns informally.

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

61. On 26 November 2022 after consulting with the HR Department Mr Martin sent Mr Lawal a letter by e-mail. In response Mr Lawal sought to clarify the differences between the first and second collective grievances. In his e-mail of 26 November 2022 sent at 12.02 Mr Lawal suggested that there were four broad topics which the security officer wished to raise. He then followed that up with a further e-mail at 12:47. He suggested that there should be a grievance hearing within 7 days and is critical of Mr Martin for delaying in arranging a meeting. He continued to sign his e-mails saying, ‘all rights reserved’. Mr Martin responded on 28 November 2022 pointing out that the description of the grievances remained ‘exceptionally broad’. He provided some information about the issues raised and asked how the complaints were put. Mr Lawal then responded suggesting that Mr Martin was endeavouring to conduct the grievance by e-mail. Mr Martin responded on the same day saying: ‘You have confirmed that they are completely new grievances so, as per my previous reply today and preceding email 18/11/2022 I am politely requesting that you clearly specify the full details about your complaint or issue and any relevant facts in accordance with the Grievance Policy which was also sent. As soon as we have this I will be able to proceed, arrange and send invites to the in person meeting’.

62. Mr Martin had been seeking the advice of the HR Department in relation to his responses in respect of the grievance. On 28 November 2022 a member of the HR team Michelle Pincock sent an e-mail to undisclosed recipients where she said; ‘I’m obviously not that close to this one but being brought in as this is a problematic group of people for the management team to actually continue to manage’. Her e-mail went on to give advice. She suggested that somebody needed to check that ‘we are doing the right thing’ the remaining parts of her letter make it clear that she is referring to the processes and not the substance of the grievance. She says that, unless the employees have been told otherwise a suggestion should be made that they appoint one representative. Whilst the Claimants have taken exception to the description of them as a ‘problematic group’ I find that Ms Pinnock was not expecting her e-mail to be disclosed to the Claimants. She wrote it in circumstances where it had reasonably appeared that Mr Lawal was seeking to reopen the first collective grievance and had needed considerable persuasion to give even the broad details of the second grievance.

63. In an e-mail sent at 19:20 on 28 November 2022 Mr Lawal distilled the grievances into two broad issues. These were: Point one - The Collective Grievance is about Security Officers doing duties that are not part of our job roles, not part of our job description. Whether Mitie group plc have or haven’t instigated any new T&C’s, conditions or workplace rules is not what is being disputed, the dispute is Security Officers believe they are being exploited forced to do roles not part of their job description. The outcome or solution is to be effectively be relived of roles that is not stipulated in our contract, not part of our job role/ job description. These points can be discussed further in a face to face Collective grievance Meeting. Point two- The dispute about health and safety is in regarding to the

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

temperatures in the FCC, preservation of water and filter in FCC, not enough bins in FCC not being regularly changed and lack of risk assessments in other health & safety matters. The desired outcome/ solution would be to improve and implement all points bought up in the face to face Collective Grievance meeting where we collectively can further discuss these issues.

64. At this point I find that Mr Martin felt that he had sufficient clarity to proceed. The security officers who Mr Lawal had copied into the correspondence, including Mr Lancaster and Mr Bempah, were sent an invitation to a meeting but were asked to nominate a spokesperson in accordance with the grievance policy. They were informed that they were entitled to be accompanied by a trade union representative. The hearing was initially fixed for 2 December 2022. Mr Lawal took up the opportunity to be represented by a Trade union representative from the GMB and asked for the time of the meeting to be changed. Mr Martin agreed to change the meeting to the earliest date proposed by Mr Lawal which was 9 December 2022.

65. In advance of the meeting on 9 December 2022 the security officers compiled a document that had 49 issues or concerns. Some of the points set out in the document corresponded at least to an extent with the issues that had ultimately been identified by Mr Lawal. A significant number of others were outside the scope of what had been indicated. The additional issues included for example the calculation of holiday pay with a suggestion that the Respondent had not implemented the decision in Harpur Trust v Brazel.

66. Mr Lawal attended as the spokesperson of the employees concerned in the collective grievance. At no stage has there been any clarity on whose behalf the grievance was raised other than the individuals copied into Mr Lawal’s various e-mails, Those individuals included Mr Lancaster and Mr Bempah but not Mr Haque. A Mr Charles Pittway attended the meeting as a representative of the GMB. Mrs Winslade was appointed as note taker. Shortly after the meeting started she had a panic attack. She says, and I accept, that she was unable to deal with the meeting with Mr Lawal as she found him so difficult to deal with. It is not suggested by anybody that the meeting was not conducted in a perfectly civil way.

67. The process for compiling a record of the meeting was the same in this grievance as in the first collective grievance. Mr Lawal was sent a copy of the notes. He suggested a number of amendments the majority of which Mr Martin accepted and then the notes were finally agreed without any reservations. They are clearly not verbatim as the meeting lasted 1 hour and 23 minutes and the notes are just 6 pages long. However, for the reasons I have given above I am satisfied that all of the important points have been captured.

68. Mr Laval sought to introduce the document with 49 points in it. Mr Martin told Mr Lawal that he wanted to follow the grievance policy and deal with the issues that had been set out in writing in advance. He pointed out that this had been pointed out ‘multiple times’. Mr Martin made it clear that his refusal to deal with the list of 49 points did not preclude them being brought up through ‘appropriate means’. Mr Lawal is recorded as saying that he had not realised that was the case. Mr Pittway is recorded as agreeing that any questions should have been

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

sent in advance of the meeting. He ‘concurred’ with Mr Martin’s advice and said that the list of issues would be reviewed and reconsidered after the meeting. At the conclusion of the meeting Mr Martin repeated his suggestion that if the grievance participants wanted to raise other matters they could do so if they thought it necessary.

69. Mr Martin went through the grievance dealing with the two points in turn. The first point was broadly that the security offices felt that they were being asked to take on duties in excess of what was contractually required. Mr Martin asked Mr Lawal to expand upon that and Mr Lawal described a broad range of duties from turning on the escalators through to crowd control. Mr Pittway interjected and said that risk assessments should have been prepared for turning on escalators. Mr Martin told him that they had been. That was factually correct. A copy of the risk assessment for escalators was included in the trial bundle. Mr Martin asked Mr Lawal what he saw as a solution to the first issue raised in the grievance. Mr Lawal said that he thought more security officers needed to be recruited.

70. Mr Martin then turned to the second point raised in the grievance. He said that he thought that there were two parts within that second point. The first concerned identified issues such as the temperature in the Security and Fire Control Center, water filters and bins he called that 2a. The second was identified as a lack of risk assessments and other health and safety matters, he referred to that as 2b.

71. When Mr Martin introduced the topic, 2a, there was an intervention by Mr Pittway. He asked Mr Lawal if he had reported any of the issues previously. Mr Lawal said that he had not. Mr Pittway then said that these sorts of issues needed to be reported and that the issues were straightforward and relatively low level. He said that they did not need to be raised in a grievance. He suggested that things like emptying bins were a matter of collective responsibility. The discussion that followed appears to have been collegiate and constructive. Mr Martin agreed to raise issues with the cleaning team and advised that the air conditioning with heating was now working in the rest area.

72. The minutes of the meeting record that Mr Martin then moved on to ‘Point 2a’. Mr Lawal agreed that that was a typing error and that the conversation turned to what Mr Martin had identified as Point 2b. Mr Lawal opened the discussion referring to a general lack of risk assessments and after-care. Mr Martin asked him to be more specific. Mr Lawal then raised the issues of the temperature within the shopping centre. He questioned whether there was a legal minimum and referred to the provision of uniform. Mr Martin then said that he would not be revisiting the question of uniform because that had been dealt with in the first collective grievance. He said that gloves had been delivered and woolly hats were on order and were expected imminently. The minutes of the discussions that took place on the issue of uniform are clearly very condensed. I find that there was a discussion about the uniform guidance and in particular the fact that different guidance applied to those working outdoors or near the exit doors. It appears there was also a discussion about post-incident procedures. I understand that to mean care for the security offices who had been involved in potentially traumatic incidents.

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

73. The meeting then turned to the issue of risk assessments that had been raised by Mr Lawal. The minutes record that he asked how risk assessments were formulated and what they covered. It does not appear that he specifically complained about a lack of any particular risk assessment. The minutes then record a joint discussion where it is said that both Mr Martin and Mr Pittway described the formulation of risk assessments. After that the minutes record Mr Martin asking Mr Lawal whether he had any specific concerns regarding issues not covered by risk assessment. Mr Lawal raised the issue of second-hand furniture in the staff rest area that had been procured from a vaccination centre used during the Covid pandemic. Mr Martin is recorded as saying that this was a stopgap and had been an improvement on what had been in place. There was a proposal to move to a larger facility in the Unite building.

74. Mr Lawal then returned to the issue of ‘after-care’. He referred specifically to the rise in suicides and asked what Westfield and the Respondent were doing about this. Mr Martin referred to guidance that had previously been communicated. He suggested that after-care was provided by the duty management doing welfare checks and a debriefing together with signposted to specialist support services including a Traumatic Advice Line and the Employee Assistance Program. He referred Mr Lawal to the staff handbook. The minutes record that there were at this stage positive comments made by both Mr Lawal and Mr Pittway. I am satisfied that, at least at the time, Mr Lawal recognised that Mr Martin had dealt with the queries that he had raised.

75. The final topic raised by Mr Lawal was a request that the security officers were provided with lighter body armour. That was dealt with principally by Mr Pittway. He is recorded as saying that at present the security office were issued with top level body armour that had been the subject of consultation. It appears that he at least considered that the Respondent had provided suitable protective equipment. Mr Martin is recorded as saying that uniform was something which was constantly reviewed and he would take on board the feedback.

76. I have summarised the discussions that took place at the grievance hearing at some length. I find that Mr Martin gave Mr Lawal every opportunity to explain what his grievance was about. It is clear that on a number of issues a degree of consensus was expressed during the meeting. The Claimants were unable to point to anything which indicated that Mr Martin was not prepared to listen or consider any of the points that are being raised in advance of the meeting.

77. The process of agreeing the minutes lasted until 16 December 2022. Mr Martin produced an investigation report by 3 January 2023. Mr Martin provided an executive summary. He said that the grievances related to the security officer being expected to carry out duties outside their job description was not upheld. He then said that he had partially upheld the grievances relating to the concerns relating to the break room as they had been legitimately raised. He went on to say that they could have been resolved more quickly had they been raised informally.

78. It is clear from the report produced that Mr Martin dealt with the first part of the grievance by looking at a document entitled Westfield Security Officer General Duties Assignment Instruction. He concluded that the duties referred to by Mr

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

Lawal all fell within the expected job role. He concluded that the full range of duties was the same as had been undertaken when Securitas held the contract.

79. He then deals with the grievances that were raised about the Security and Fire Control Centre suite (including the staff rest area.) He stated that informal resolutions had not been sought before the grievance was lodged. He had spoken to the cleaning contractor Operations Manager who had said that additional cleaning would be carried out if he was notified of any issue. He said that there was a supplementary air conditioner which could provide heating within the rest room and that it had been reported as working during a recent cold spell. He acknowledged that a water filter for drinking water required replacement but pointed out that tap water is drinkable. Mr Martin recorded in his report that the issues around the rest area were raised constructively.

80. Mr Martin set out details of the risk assessment process undertaken by the Respondent. His recommendations included a suggestion that any such issues are raised initially with the duty managers or at staff engagement opportunities. He encouraged the staff to engage proactively and informally at an early stage.

81. I find that there was no unreasonable delay between the meeting that took place on 9 December 2022 and preparing an outcome report on 3 January 2023. It is clear that Mr Martin needed to speak to the cleaning contractor and to interrogate documentation in order to reach the conclusions that he did. He was preparing this report over the Christmas period. In all, I consider that he worked reasonably quickly to produce his report.

82. There was a short delay between Mr Martin completing his report and him sending it to Mr Lawal on 12 January 2024. I infer that the reason for the delay was that the outcome letter was run past the HR Department as there was a need to offer a right of appeal to a named individual. The individual named in the first iteration of the letter was Mathew Pitman who was the Security Operations Manager for Westfield’s shopping centre in West London.

83. Mr Lawal pursued an individual grievance. One aspect of this grievance was the delay in receiving the outcome of the collective grievance decision. That aspect of the grievance was not initially upheld but was upheld on appeal to Mr Pitman the Operations Manager of Westfields in West London. He said that ‘there should have been no delay in responding to the collective grievance’. Mr Martin says, and I accept, that in reaching this conclusion Mr Pitman did not ask him for any explanation. Mr Pitman appears to have considered that the grievance was presented on 17 November 2022. That is a very generous approach to Mr Lawal. The initial stages of the process were as I have said above included extracting the subject matter of the grievance from Mr Lawal. I find that Mr Pitman’s conclusion that there was culpable delay in this respect is unrealistic and unfair to Mr Martin. Mr Martin’s involvement in the Claimant not being offered shifts and Mr Lawal’s sick leave.

84. The Claimant raised the fact that he was not being offered shifts with Mr Martin when he attended the grievance meeting on 9 December 2022. On 10

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

December 2022 he sent Mr Martin an e-mail saying that he was fit enough to work. He signed himself off as ‘all rights reserved’. Mr Martin responded on 11 December saying; ‘Please report in directly to the Duty STM and your Line Manager as instructed in discussion on Friday morning; they can coordinate your return to work and shift scheduling going forward.’. Mrs Winslade and Mr Nicholas were copied into that e-mail. I find that it was clear that Mr Martin had accepted that Mr Lawal was fit enough to do some work based on his assertions. Mr Martin followed that up on 17 December 2022 with a reminder that Mr Lawal needed to speak with a duty Security Team Manager to co- ordinate a return to work and that he had pre-rostered shifts from Monday 19 December 2022.

85. Mr Lawal did not attend work on 19 December 2022. At 20:45 he sent an e- mail to Mr Martin and Mr Islam he said that he had previously contacted his managers about returning to work. That was correct but the e-mails predate Mr Martin’s instruction. Mr Lawal went on to question who had allocated him shifts commencing 19 December 2022. I find that there is a tension between Mr Lawal complaining that he had not been allowed to do his shifts in November and his complaint that he had not been notified of his shifts commencing 19 December 2022. It does not seem that Mr Lawal contacted his managers after Mr Martin had told him that he could return to work.

86. Later on 19 December 2022 Mr Lawal sent a further e-mail. He attached a fitness for work certificate indicating that he was unfit for work until 2 January 2023. Mr Lawal suggested in his e-mail that the cause of this was his treatment by the Respondents. He referred to being discriminated against and victimised by various members of management. Mr Lawal’s request for paid leave to attend a trade union course

87. Mr Lawal is a member of the GMB Union. On 23 November 2022 he was elected as a Shop Steward and Health and Safety Representative. Paul Meddes, a Regional Organiser for the GMB wrote to the ‘Operations Manager’ (Mr Martin) informing him of Mr Lawal’s election and asking ‘if [Mr Lawal] could be afforded the usual facilities’. He went on to indicate that Mr Lawal would be invited to do a training course and ‘trusted that they will be granted paid release’.

88. The position of the Respondent is that the GMB is not a recognised trade union at Westfield Stratford. Mr Lawal disagreed but I was not provided with any evidence that the GMB was formally recognised and I find that it was not. As I set out below Mr Lawal was eventually told that he would not be permitted paid leave because the union was not recognised. I find that, had this been incorrect, it is overwhelmingly likely that it would have been challenged by the GMB.

89. On 29 November 2022 Mr Lawal was invited to apply for a place on a 5-day training course for Workplace Organisers starting from 16 January 2023. Mr Lawal sent Mr Martin an e-mail on 10 December 2022 asking if he could be given paid time off to attend that course. He received no response to that e- mail. He sent a reminder on 23 December 2022. Again he received no

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

response. Mr Martin was corresponding with the Claimant in respect of the minutes and in respect of his return to work at least up to 19 December 2022.

90. Mr Lawal sent an e-mail to the GMB on 2 January 2023 asking for advice about whether the Respondent’s conduct amounted to discrimination because of his trade union activity. I have not seen any advice given. On 10 January he contacted the GMB again asking them to intervene and to write to Mr Martin asking if he would ‘fill out this form’. I assume that is the form required to book the training course. Helen Mendieta from the GMB did as Mr Lawal had requested and asked Mr Martin directly to fill out a release form. Mr Lawal sent a further e-mail to Mr Martin on 12 January 2023 saying that when he had been employed by Securitas the GMB Union had been recognised and saying that that agreement should have transferred to the Respondent. That e-mail prompted the first reply on this subject by Mr Martin. He responded to say that he had raised the issue with HR and that there was no recognised trade union and that paid time off was therefore not available. Mr Martin then sent that e- mail to Mr Bland, Mrs Winslade and Mr Nicholas ‘FYI’.

91. I find that at some point, and I find that it was probably not before early January 2023, Mr Martin has escalated the Claimant’s request for paid time off to Mr Bland. He in turn had asked the HR Department whether paid time off ought to have been granted. I reach that conclusion because it is clear from an e-mail sent from Mr Bland to Mr Martin on 11 January 2023 that Mr Bland had passed on a draft of the e-mail that Mr Martin would eventually send Mr Lawal. In his e-mail Mr Bland says ‘see below the context we have had back for this’.

92. Mr Lawal brought a grievance in respect of the delay in responding to his request for paid time off. On appeal Mr Pitman upheld that grievance. I am not surprised. In contrast to the decision-making process in respect of the delay in determining the second collective grievance there was no good explanation for the delay in dealing with the request for time off. I accept Mr Martin’s evidence that Mr Pitman did not speak to him. However other than saying correctly that he needed to seek advice from HR about this matter his explanation as to why responding to the Claimant took as long as it did was essentially that he had too much on his plate due to the Christmas period. Below, I accept his explanation, but that does not mean that Mr Lawal could not be properly aggrieved at the delay. The grievance appeal to Mr Bland.

93. The outcome of the second collective grievance was sent to Mr Lawal on 12 January 2023. The letter set out the possibility of a right of appeal. The person identified was Mr Pitman. It appears from the correspondence that it was Mr Bland who nominated Mr Pitman to hear the appeal. On 13 January 2023 Mr Lawal questioned whether Mr Pitman was an appropriate person to hear his grievance he suggested that as Mr Martin and Mr Pitman were both Operations Managers they were at the same level of seniority. He asked for a more senior person to hear the appeal. Ian Martin forwarded Mr Lawal’s e-mail to Mr Bland who in turn sent it to Ms Pincock. Mr Martin had expressed a view that Mr Pitman was senior within the business but suggested Mr Bland sought the advice of HR. Mr Bland in his e-mail to Ms Pincock said: ‘In my eyes [Mr Pitman]

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

can overturn any decisions if he so requires. But I’ll take a steer from you….I’ll be honest, I’m not sure I have the patience’s [sic] to listen to this currently’.

94. Ms Pincock’s response was to suggest that Mr Lawal was correct and that the person hearing the appeal should be more senior although she said that it did not need to be Mr Bland. She went on to question whether Mr Laval was leading the collective grievance process whilst he was on sick leave. In a second e-mail she says ‘I need to pick this up next week to better understand what’s going on with this guy. He’s off sick while we are trying to sort 2 x ETs he has in……..I feel like he is stirring up a lot of unrest and taking up a lot of management time also’.

95. Ms Pincock is correct when she noted that by this time Mr Lawal had commenced two claims in the Employment Tribunal. The subject matter of those claims concerned the shifts that were cancelled when he was sent home by Mr Qammar.

96. The grievance outcome letter was resent on 17 January 2023 and this time identified Mr Bland as the person appointed to hear the appeal. The appeal hearing took place on 17 February 2023. The notes of the appeal hearing record that the hearing was very brief. Mr Lawal and Mr Lancaster attended on behalf of the employees. Notes were taken by Naveed Butt. Mr Lawal introduced the appeal by referring back to the first collective grievance and the petition signed by 57 employees. He then went on to say that the employees had decided that they wanted the appeal to be conducted in writing. He then handed Mr Bland a 7 page document saying that some of the issues were health and safety related. He complained about the length of the process and asked for an appeal outcome ‘within ten days’. He said ‘Our expectations are hopefully, reasonable adjustments to relevant policies, health safety, workload and better working environment and also a reasonable outcome to a equal pay dispute. Also, some of the questions we have added a recommendation to. Also, a review holiday of entitlement.’

97. Mr Bland told the employees that he was on annual leave the following week. He suggested that it would have been better if they had presented their document prior to the day of the meeting. He said he would consider it and would revert to them if he had any questions.

98. I consider that asking for a meeting and then when a meeting was arranged asking for the appeal to be conducted in writing was not a very sensible approach by Mr Lawal and Mr Lancaster. The appeal meeting was their opportunity to explain why they considered that the outcome reached by Mr Martin was wrong.

99. Mr Bland reviewed the document provided by Mr Lawal and Mr Lancaster. He says that he considered that the points raised by the employees in that document were new points that ‘deviated significantly from the agreed scope of the grievance’. He says that he came to the conclusion that as there was no challenge to the conclusions of Mr Martin there was no basis upon which he could uphold the appeal. On 6 March 2023 he sent out a decision letter confirming his decision not to uphold the appeal. In respect of the points raised

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

by the employees he said: ‘I advise that as you have raised other points outside of your original grievance sent to Ian Martin and outside the two main points you raised and agreed, you would be required to raise a further grievance on the 29 points you have brought to the appeal meeting’.

100. I find that the document presented by the employees to Mr Bland does raise matters that were not dealt with by Mr Martin. The employees had been told very clearly by Mr Martin that he was not prepared to deal with their 49 point document. His outcome dealt only with the matters that had been discussed at the meeting. The document presented to Mr Bland went beyond the document presented to Mr Martin. It raises numerous completely new complaints.

Mr Lawal’s training

101. Mr Lawal says that he was denied the opportunity to engage in training. He refers in particular to the fact that his name appeared in a roster for training on 23 January 2023 but that he was rostered to do other duties instead.

102. I find that Mrs Winslade instigated a training program and drew up a roster for the security guards to complete the training during their working hours. An employee with log in details could access the online training outside working hours but there was no expectation that they would do so. Training during working hours involved the employees logging in to a computer terminal in the FCC area.

103. Mr Lawal did not do his allocated training on 23 January 2023. He was working on that day and I find that he was allocated other duties. I accept the evidence given by all of the management witnesses and, in particular by Mr Islam, that whilst a roster for training had been drawn up it would sometimes be necessary for operational reasons to allocate the employees other duties. That makes sense to me as a roster drawn up in advance may well have to give way to any contingencies. Mr Lawal did not complain that he had missed his training at the time.

104. Mrs Winslade said in her witness statement, and I accept, that details of how to log in to the training software were placed on a poster next to the computer in the rest area. If an employee lost their access details they had to contact a central office as log in details were associated with payroll numbers. It was only in May 2023 that Mr Lawal raised an issue about being able to log in to the training software and only after he had been chased to complete his training. It did take some time to resolve the log in issues but Mr Lawal was given all reasonable assistance with this.

The incident between Mr Lancaster and Mrs Winslade

105. On 8 February 2022 there was an incident between Mrs Winslade and Mr Lancaster. Mrs Winslade made a complaint about what happened to Mr Badr- Safdari on 9 February 2022. There is some common ground between the account that she gave of this incident and the account given by Mr Lancaster. Both agree that Mr Lancaster was in the rest area and that he had made himself a cup of coffee. Both accept that Mrs Winslade challenged Mr Lancaster about

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

why he was not on patrol as his shift had already started. Mr Lancaster told Mrs Winslade that he had been asked to write a report. Mrs Winslade says that that is unlikely to be true. She says that it would only be in exceptional circumstances that writing a report would take precedence over patrolling the shopping centre. I consider I need to resolve this issue. I take into account what I have described as the entrenched views of both protagonists. I found neither to be a very convincing witness. However, I accept the explanation given by Mrs Winslade for doubting the reasons put forward by Mr Lancaster’s account of being asked to write a report. He was unable to give good explanation of why there was any urgency that would justify him not taking up his allocated patrol. On balance I find that Mr Lancaster seized on an excuse for delaying the start of his patrol.

106. It is common ground that Mrs Winslade told Mr Lancaster to pour his coffee away and to start his patrol. There is a dispute as to the manner in which this was done. Mr Lancaster suggests that Mrs Winslade shouted at him. She does not accept this. I find that it is probable that Mrs Winslade was very abrupt with Mr Lancaster to the point of bluntness. I do not accept that she shouted at him. I accept that he would have been embarrassed to have been addressed in that way in front of colleagues.

107. There is a further dispute about what happened next. Mrs Winslade says that she turned to return to her shared office and that Mr Lancaster approached her saying ‘what did you say’ repeatedly. She accepts that she repeated her instruction to pour the coffee away. She then says that Mr Lancaster said: don’t talk to me like my mum’. He disputes using that exact phrase but when later interviewed accepted that he said ‘don’t speak to me like your my parents’ I find that this was a heated conversation on both sides. Mr Lancaster had been in the wrong, he should have been on patrol, Mrs Winslade reacted to this robustly and did scold Mr Lancaster as if he was a child. I find it probable that he did respond in the way that Mrs Winslade has recorded. I find that it was a most unfortunate situation where neither party behaved well. However, I accept the root cause was that Mr Lancaster was having a coffee when he ought to have been on patrol.

108. An HR ‘ticket’ was raised. Mr Badr-Safdari was appointed to investigate the matter. It is not clear to me whether the ticket was raised before or after Victoria Winslade wrote her e-mail. It is not important.

109. Mr Badr-Safdari invited Mr Lancaster to a meeting that was to take place on 11 February 2023. Mr Lancaster declined to answer any questions about the incident saying that he had already raised it with another manager Robert Nicholas. Mr Badr-Safdari says that after the meeting he contacted Robert Nicholas to check what Mr Lancaster had told him. Mr Nicholas sent Mr Badr- Safdari an e-mail in which he said that Mr Lancaster had not spoken to him about this matter. I find that Mr Lancaster had misrepresented his actions. He was not waiting to speak to Mr Nicholas about this incident. He may have indicated a wish to speak to him about something else. I find that Mr Lancaster was deliberately not co-operating with the investigation.

110. There was then a considerable delay because of annual leave taken by

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

Mr Badr-Safdari. Eventually a meeting was arranged between Mr Lancaster and Mr Badr-Safdari for 15 March 2023. In that meeting Mr Lancaster suggested that a different manager had asked him to write a report. This is one matter that I have relied upon to reject his evidence. He denied shouting at Mrs Winslade. He said that his tone was ‘subtle’.

111. Mr Lancaster named four individuals who he says witnessed the incident. Mr Badr-Safdari says that he spoke to all four but that none had any recollection of the events. Mr Lancaster relies on that to say that he did nothing wrong. I do not agree. On his own case there was an altercation. The inference I draw is that either these witnesses could not remember what had happened or they did not wish to get involved.

112. Mr Badr-Safdari decided that there was insufficient witness evidence to substantiate Mrs Winslade’s account. No further action was taken in respect of these events. I find that the approach taken by Mr Badr-Safdari was very benevolent to Mr Lancaster. He could consider himself fortunate that the matter was not referred to a disciplinary hearing where the two competing accounts could be heard.

Mr Lawal being allocated ‘Keys Duties’ From February 2023

113. Mr Lawal’s complaint is that he was shown on the roster as being allocated key holder duties despite the fact that he had told the Respondent that his difficulties with his back meant that he could not carry out those duties. He makes that complaint from February but the situation is similar to that occurring in December 2022.

114. There is no dispute that on the roster Mr Lawal was shown as being allocated key duties. What Mr Lawal has glossed over in his claim and his evidence is the question of whether he was ever actually asked to carry out those duties. The Respondent’s evidence from Mr Lawal’s direct managers is that as the roster was posted the keys duties would be assigned without any thought being given to whether the employee would perform them. The security guards usually worked in pairs and if not another guard would be asked to take on any duties that another guard might not be able to do. They say that Mr Lawal’s back issues were known about and were accommodated. I accept their evidence. Mr Lawal did not actually contradict this evidence within his witness statement but, as noted by Ms Hicks when cross examining the Respondent’s witnesses he did suggest that he had been asked to do some keys duties. I find that this only came to be Mr Lawal’s case when he recognised the obvious difficulties of complaining about simply being shown on a roster as being allocated keys duties. I find that he was not.

115. Mr Lawal returned to work on 21 January 2023. On 22 January 2023 he made a report through a reporting system called Lifeline where he said that he had suffered a back strain in November 2022 having been asked to do escalator duties whilst wearing body armour. Mr Islam noted that this matter had not been reported at the time. Mr Lawal appears to believe that it was the Respondent’s obligation to report this injury. I find that Mr Lawal did not suggest at the time that he had had a workplace accident or anything that required to be reported.

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

116. Mr Islam initially was responsible for managing Mr Lawal’s return to work. He agreed informally to make adjustments for Mr Lawal and in particular would not expect him to do any lifting or bending associated with turning escalators on and off. He referred to that informal agreement in an e-mail he sent Mr Lawal on 29 January 2023.

117. On 9 February 2023 Mr Islam conducted a formal return to work interview with Mr Lawal. The record of that meeting shows that Mr Islam agreed that Mr Lawal would not be expected to undertake any duties that might affect his back until medical evidence was obtained.

118. I find that in the light of the efforts made by Mr Islam to understand and accommodate Mr Lawal’s issues with his back that he would continue to allocate the Claimant those duties in a complete reversal of what he had recorded.

Negative comments about Mr Lawal’s dress

119. On 15 February 2023 Mr Lawal approached Mrs Winslade in the office and asked her whether he was allowed to wear a hat. Mrs Winslade told him that the security officers had to follow the dress code imposed by Westfield. They were allowed to wear a branded Beanie hat outdoors but were required to be bare headed indoors. Mrs Winslade recorded this conversation in an e-mail to Ian Martin when she sought his advice. She went on to say that Mr Lawal had suggested that he needed to wear a hat as it was cold. He asked to see the policy document and was not prepared to accept Mrs Winslade’s explanation. For that reason she referred to matter to Mr Martin. Mr Lawal also sent an e- mail on the same day. He referred to a manager asking him to remove his hat and gives that as the reason he spoke to Mrs Winslade. He said that he suffered from the shivers and felt constantly cold. He asked to be allowed to wear a hat as a ‘reasonable adjustment’. Ian Martin responded and suggested that this should not have been escalated to him in the first instance. He then confirmed what Mrs Winslade had said about the uniform policy at Westfield. That position was further confirmed by Mr Nicolas on the same day. There was no suggestion by Mr Lawal that he wore a head covering for religious reasons.

120. Somewhat later there was a complete change of position by Mr Lawal. He said that he needed to wear a hat for religious reasons. It is common ground that he was told that this would be accommodated as it was for other security guards. Thereafter Mr Lawal often wore a hat that was clearly associated with his Islamic faith.

121. On 15 May 2023 Mrs Winslade noted that Mr Lawal had reverted to wearing what she believed was an ordinary woollen hat as opposed to the branded hats provided by the Respondent or the religious headgear that the Claimant had been permitted to wear. Mrs Winslade told Mr Lawal that he could either wear the branded hat in accordance with the uniform policy or his religious headgear. Mr Lawal then said that he would put on the branded headgear. Mrs Winslade decided to turn a blind eye to the fact that he was wearing that indoors which was a breach of the uniform policy.

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

The law to be applied

Protected disclosure claims

122. The protection for workers who draw attention to failings by their employers or others, often referred to as ‘whistle-blowers’, was introduced by the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1994 which introduced a new Part IVA to the Employment Rights Act 1996.

123. In Jesudason v Alder Hey Children’s NHS Foundation Trust [2020] ICR 1226 Elias LJ described the purposes of the protection as follows: ‘Ever since the introduction of the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998, the law has sought to provide protection for workers (colloquially known as whistleblowers”) who raise concerns or make allegations about alleged malpractices in the workplace. Too often the response of the employer has been to penalise the whistleblower by acts of victimisation rather than to investigate the concerns identified. The 1998 Act inserted a new Part IVA into the Employment Rights Act 1996 designed to prevent this. The long title to the Act describes its purpose as follows: “An Act to protect individuals who make certain disclosures of information in the public interest: to allow such individuals to bring action in respect of victimisation; and for connected purposes.” The law which gives effect to the simple principle enunciated in the long title is far from straightforward. The basic principle, set out in section 47B of the Employment Rights Act 1996, is that a worker has the right not to be subject to a detriment by any act of his employer on the grounds that he has made what is termed a “protected disclosure”.’

124. Section 43A of the Employment Rights Act 1996 provides that a disclosure will be protected if it satisfies the definition of a ‘qualifying disclosure’ and is made in any of the circumstances set out in Sections 43C-H. The material parts of the statutory definition of what amounts to a qualifying disclosure are found in Section 43B of the Employment Rights Act 1996 which says: 43B Disclosures qualifying for protection.

(1) In this Part a “qualifying disclosure” means any disclosure of information which, in the reasonable belief of the worker making the disclosure, is made in the public interest and tends to show one or more of the following—

(a) that a criminal offence has been committed, is being committed or is likely to be committed,
(b) that a person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation to which he is subject,
(c) that a miscarriage of justice has occurred, is occurring or is likely to occur,
(d) that the health or safety of any individual has been, is being or is likely to be endangered, Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others
(e) that the environment has been, is being or is likely to be damaged, or
(f) that information tending to show any matter falling within any one of the preceding paragraphs has been, is being or is likely to be deliberately concealed.

125. The proper approach to assessing whether there is a qualifying disclosure for the purposes of Section 43B is that summarised by HHJ Aurbach in Williams

v. Michelle Brown AM UKEAT/0044/19/OO. He said: "It is worth restating, as the authorities have done many times, that this definition breaks down into a number of elements. First, there must be a disclosure of information. Secondly, the worker must believe that the disclosure is made in the public interest. Thirdly, if the worker does hold such a belief, it must be reasonably held. Fourthly, the worker must believe that the disclosure tends to show one or more of the matters listed in sub-paragraphs (a) to (f). Fifthly, if the worker does hold such a belief, it must be reasonably held."

126. To amount to a ‘disclosure of information’, it is necessary that the worker conveys some facts to their employer (or other person). In Kilraine v London Borough of Wandsworth 2018 ICR 1850, CA the meaning of that phrase was explained by Sales LJ as follows (with emphasis added): “35. The question in each case in relation to section 43B(1) (as it stood prior to amendment in 2013) is whether a particular statement or disclosure is a "disclosure of information which, in the reasonable belief of the worker making the disclosure, tends to show one or more of the [matters set out in sub-paragraphs (a) to (f)]". Grammatically, the word "information" has to be read with the qualifying phrase, "which tends to show [etc]" (as, for example, in the present case, information which tends to show "that a person has failed or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation to which he is subject"). In order for a statement or disclosure to be a qualifying disclosure according to this language, it has to have a sufficient factual content and specificity such as is capable of tending to show one of the matters listed in subsection (1)…….

36. Whether an identified statement or disclosure in any particular case does meet that standard will be a matter for evaluative judgment by a tribunal in the light of all the facts of the case. It is a question which is likely to be closely aligned with the other requirement set out in section 43B(1), namely that the worker making the disclosure should have the reasonable belief that the information he discloses does tend to show one of the listed matters. As explained by Underhill LJ in Chesterton Global at [8], this has both a subjective and an objective element. If the worker subjectively believes that the information he discloses does tend to show one of the listed matters and the statement or disclosure he makes has a sufficient factual content and specificity such that it is capable of tending to show that listed matter, it is likely that his belief will be a reasonable belief.”

127. The effect of Section 43B Employment Rights Act 1996 is that to amount to a qualifying disclosure, at the point when the disclosure was made, the worker must hold a belief that (1) the information tends to show one of the failings in subsection 43B(1) (a) – (e) and (2) that the disclosure is in the public interest. If that test is satisfied the Tribunal need to consider whether those beliefs were objectively reasonable. The proper approach was set out in Chesterton

Case Number: 3200538/2023 & Others

Global Ltd (t/a Chestertons) and anor v Nurmohamed (Public Concern at Work intervening) 2018 ICR 731, CA where Underhill LJ said:

26. The issue in this appeal turns on the meaning, and the proper application to the facts, of the phrase "in the public interest". But before I get to that question I would like to make four points about the nature of the exercise required by section 43B (1).

27. First, and at the risk of stating the obvious, the words added by the 2013 Act fit into the structure of section 43B as expounded in Babula (see para. 8 above). The tribunal thus has to ask (a) whether the worker believed, at the time that he was making it, that the disclosure was in the public interest and (b) whether, if so, that belief was reasonable.

28. Second, and hardly moving much further from the obvious, element (b) in that exercise requires the tribunal to recognise, as in the case of any other reasonableness review, that there may be more than one reasonable view as to whether a particular disclosure was in the public interest; and that is perhaps particularly so given that that question is of its nature so broad-textured. The parties in their oral submissions referred both to the "range of reasonable responses" approach applied in considering whether a dismissal is unfair under Part X of the 1996 Act and to "the Wednesbury approach" employed in (some) public law cases. Of course we are in essentially the same territory, but I do not believe that resort to tests formulated in different contexts is helpful. All that matters is that the Tribunal should be careful not to substitute its own view of whether the disclosure was in the public interest for that of the worker. That does not mean that it is illegitimate for the tribunal to form its own view on that question, as part of its thinking – that is indeed often difficult to avoid – but only that that view is not as such determinative.