RESERVED JUDGMENT

The Judgment of the Tribunal is that:

1. The claimant was unfairly dismissed by the first respondent. His claim for ordinary unfair dismissal succeeds.

2. The following of the claimant’s claims for victimisation succeed:

- In respect of the decision on 25 February 2021 to proceed with an SOSR dismissal.
- Holding a return to work interview on 26 April 2021 when statements against the claimant were read out to him.
- Dismiss the claimant on 30 July 2021.

3. The following of the claimant’s claims for failure to make reasonable adjustments succeed:

- Dealing with suspensions too slowly and fail to tell the claimant in a reasonable time what the outcome was.
- The failure to allow the claimant to take someone with him to the mediation meetings on 3 and 4 March 2021.
- The failure to allow the claimant to have a companion at the head office meeting on 26 April 2021.

4. All the claimant’s other claims for automatic unfair dismissal due to whistleblowing, direct discrimination on the grounds of disability, failure to make reasonable adjustments, harassment related to disability, victimisation, whistleblowing detriment, breach of contract and holiday pay are not well founded and are dismissed.

5. The case will be listed for a hearing to determine remedy for those claims which succeed.

REASONS

Claims and issues

1. The claimant’s claims were for:

1.1 detriment on the grounds of having made a protected disclosure (section 47B Employment Rights Act 1996);
1.2 automatically unfair dismissal due to having made a protected disclosure (section Employment Rights Act 1996);
1.3 ordinary unfair dismissal under s.94 Employment Rights Act 1996;
1.4 direct disability discrimination under s.13 Equality Act 2010;
1.5 failure to make reasonable adjustments (section 20-21 Equality Act 2010);
1.6 harassment on the grounds of disability (section 26 Equality Act 2010);
1.7 victimisation (section 27 Equality Act 2010);
1.8 unlawful deductions from wages;
1.9 holiday pay;
1.10 breach of contract regarding sick pay; and
1.11 breach of right to be accompanied. 2 The issues were finalised at a preliminary hearing held on 27 January 2023. The final list of issues is appended to this judgment. 3 In the claimant’s written submissions he confirmed that he was not pursuing any claim for failure to make reasonable adjustments based on the practice the claimant said the respondent have of providing insufficient notice for investigation meetings (Issue 9.2.11 in the attached list). He also confirmed that he no longer alleged having done something that was a protected at on 9 February 2021. All other claims were pursued. 4 For the purposes of the disability discrimination claim, the claimant says he was disabled at all relevant times because of anxiety and depression. The claimant accepts that the claimant was disabled due to anxiety and depression from November 2020 but says it only had knowledge of disability from March 2021. We had to determine whether the claimant was disabled at all material times or, if not, at what point in time the claimant was disabled. We have also had to determine when the respondent knew or ought reasonably to have had the relevant knowledge. 5 The claimant pursued claims against the first respondent, who was his employer, and 5 named individuals. The parties did not make any submissions relating to the liability of any of the named individuals. Therefore, we have been unable to fully engage in this question in respect of the claims we have upheld. The parties will need to make relevant submissions on liability of named individual respondents at the remedy hearing. Procedure, documents and evidence heard 11 The claimant represented himself. The respondents were represented. 12 A bundle of documents had been prepared. The claimant also provided a supplementary bundle of documents. The claimant had provided some other documents which the respondent objected to including on the basis they were not relevant to the issues we needed to determine. These related to aspects of the claimant’s mental health and Ms Montaz said they may be upsetting to some witnesses. We did not need to make a decision at the outset of the hearing on the admissibility of those documents. We noted that they may be relevant to the question of disability. It would not be necessary for the respondents’ witnesses to be shown or asked about those documents, which should alleviate the respondents’ concerns. 13 We were also provided with a recording of the investigation meeting the claimant attended in September 2020. We were able to listen to this recording. 14 The claimant had prepared a witness statement and his mother also gave evidence on his behalf. They were both cross examined. All the named respondents had prepared statements and gave evidence. The respondents also call Sam Fletcher and Louis Monerville as witnesses. All the respondents’ witnesses were cross examined by the claimant. 15 The claimant has anxiety and depression and has more recently been diagnosed with ADHD. Aspects of the case related to a time in his life that was clearly very difficult and traumatic in his life, which impacted on his participation in the hearing. Before the hearing the claimant had been reviewed by an intermediary who had provided a report. We were able to take into account the recommendations of the intermediary during the hearing. This included providing additional breaks and at times finishing early for the day when the claimant became overwhelmed when cross-examining certain witnesses. 16 On the second day of the hearing the respondent’s representative had a personal emergency which necessitated adjourning in the afternoon. We were unable to reconvene until the fourth listed day, leaving the claimant’s evidence part-heard over the weekend. This impacted on the time available for the evidence and submissions. The parties were due to give submissions on the final day of the original hearing. The claimant did not feel able to do so in person. By agreement we ordered that the parties could make submissions in writing by 6 December 2024, which they both did. 17 Unfortunately, the Tribunal panel were unable to reconvene in chambers for deliberation until June 2024. One of the members was due to be out of the country for some time immediately after the initial hearing concluded. It then took until June before all three members were available at the same time. To avoid further delay the parties were invited to a resumed hearing in June so that judgment could be given orally. The claimant wrote to the Tribunal to say that he would be unable to attend and he requested that judgment was reserved. Anonymity 18 The underlying principle in the Employment Tribunal is that there is open justice so that hearings and judgments are public. In some circumstances the Tribunal can grant anonymity to participants. This can include situations when certain rights of individuals, such as the right to private and family life, are engaged and where in the circumstances it is proportionate to grant anonymity. 19 There were aspects of this case where the Tribunal were of the view that such rights were engaged. The claimant has experienced periods of significant mental ill health and it has been necessary to refer in the judgment to particularly difficult and sensitive matters. The claimant’s personal relationships, including the break up of his marriage and subsequent relationship, form the background to parts of the case. This requires us to refer to other individuals’ personal relationships within our findings of fact. 20 The Tribunal wrote to the parties to seek their views on whether any order should be made for anonymity under Rule 49 of the Employment Tribunal Procedure Rules 2024. The claimant made it clear to the Tribunal that he was not seeking anonymity and did not agree to anonymity. The respondents asked that if one was made that it should equally apply to the respondents, to avoid the risk of the claimant still being identifiable. 21 Given the claimant’s strong objection to anonymity we have not made an order that would anonymise his identity or that of any of the named respondents. We have decided to anonymise some of the individuals referred to in the judgment who are not named respondents. This includes the claimant’s partner at the time of the relevant events and other individuals who are related to the claimant’s ex-wife. This is due to the fact that we have had to include some details of the claimant’s relationships with both women in our findings, by way of relevant background. Both women are not parties to the claim and their right to a private life should be protected. Findings of Fact 22 We have limited our findings of that to those that directly relate to the allegations that underlie the claimant’s various claims and other matters that are direct background and context. We also heard evidence on other background matters. Some of these remained contentious, and there were disputes of fact between the party. Our findings on these background matters are limited to what has been necessary in order to determine the issues in the case. 23 We carefully considered all the evidence provided, both documentary and witness evidence. A lack of reference to any particular document or something that was said by a witness does not mean it was not considered. 24 The evidence we considered was the documents and witness evidence, which was tested in cross-examination. The case itself involves many allegations of fact by the claimant. The claimant needs to prove on the balance of probabilities that alleged events or incidents occurred as he has alleged. This requires evidence, either contemporaneous documents or a clear account of what occurred in evidence. 25 There were a number of matters which the claimant did not include a clear account in his witness evidence. The claimant then provided more detail on certain events in his written submissions. The accounts set out in the submissions are not evidence. Crucially, the respondent has not had an opportunity to cross-examine the claimant on anything additional he has set out in his written submissions. This means that little weight can be placed on additional information provided by the claimant at that stage of proceedings. Where relevant we have noted this situation in the findings of fact below. General background 26 The first respondent is a company that provides cleaning services for corporate clients. The claimant started to work for the first respondent in 2011. He was initially employed as a vertical cleaner. In 2014 he was promoted to the role of Assistant Cleaning Manager where he was based at a site called Regent’s Place. This was a site owned by British Land, who were the first respondent’s client. The first respondent was responsible for various aspects of cleaning the site. 27 The claimant was managed by Kenny Willis (the third respondent), who was the Contract Manager at the time. As well as being colleagues the claimant and Mr Willis were very good friends at times. 28 In early 2019 the claimant’s relationship with his wife broke down. The claimant’s ex-wife’s brother, MC, also worked for the first respondent, along with MC’s wife. We understood that the claimant managed MC. At some point the claimant started a new relationship with GP. GP was also employed by the first respondent. 29 Understandably this situation lead to some tensions in the workplace between the claimant and MC. The claimant says that MC became verbally abusive towards him and rumours were spread behind his back. MC is Polish and there were some other Polish employees. The claimant says that a number of other Polish employees also were part of this abuse. 30 The claimant says that initially MC was making comments that related to the break-up of the claimant’s marriage, such as making sure the claimant got nothing from their house. The claimant says that the situation continued and MC swore at him in Polish. Beyond this the claimant’s evidence about what he alleges Mr Cwik did was limited. The claimant says generally this occurred from May 2019 onwards, but gave very little evidence about what actually occurred at particular times. We accepted that in around April, May and June 2019, it was likely that people may have been spreading rumours about the claimant. This was credible in light of what had happened in the claimant’s personal life, and it is likely that MC was probably angry towards the claimant. Beyond that we can make no definite findings about any conduct of MC. This is because we were not provided with sufficient evidence on any specific incidents or occurrences. Events during 2019 31 During 2019 the claimant’s mental health began to deteriorate. There was no contemporaneous documentary evidence of this before 25 June 2019. In his evidence the claimant generally said that he had not been sleeping well and at some point started to have suicidal ideation. However, he did not give a clear account of this time. This was not surprising given that these events occurred 5 years earlier. 32 In June 2019 a Contract Manager position became available at a different site. Sam Fletcher was Senior Operations Manager at the time. Sylwia De Sousa (the sixth respondent), the Head of Operations, contacted the claimant to inform him of this. The claimant then had some discussions with Mr Fletcher about the role. 33 Ultimately the job was not formally offered to the claimant and he did not take up the role. The claimant says that he was offered the job by Mr Fletcher, but then he disclosed the mental health issues he was having and the offer was withdrawn. Mr Fletcher’s account is that the claimant was non-committal and had said he was having issues in his personal life. Mr Fletcher denies that the claimant mentioned having mental health issues, but just referred to his personal life. 34 This incident took place over 5 years ago. It was not documented at the time. There were just couple of text messages that were loosely related to these events. We accept that there was a discussion about the job, and it may have been informally offered to the claimant. The claimant says he disclosed mental health issues and this triggered the withdrawal of the offer by Mr Fletcher. The claimant needs to prove on the balance of probabilities this occurred. We do not accept that it did. There was no contemporaneous evidence of the claimant having discussed any mental health issues with anyone at this time. The claimant was close to Mr Willis but he did not refer to anything that could be viewed as symptoms of poor mental health in any of their numerous text messages before this date. The claimant had not seen his GP, this only happened later and because his mother intervened. We find it unlikely the claimant would have said openly to a potential new manager he had ongoing mental health problems when the other evidence from the time indicate that he was not open about such matters with those with whom he had closer relationships. It is more likely he did mention the personal issues he was facing. He may have indicated this meant he may not be able to focus on the job and as a result he was non-committal about the role. 35 As part of this claim the claimant says an incident occurred in July 2019 involving someone called Mike Myers. Mr Myers did not work for the first respondent, but worked at the same site for a different company. No clear account was provided by the claimant in his evidence about this incident. He provided more detailed accounts in his written submissions and in other documents that have been prepared as part of this case, but this was not evidence and was not tested. 36 Some of the first respondent’s witnesses also provided evidence about this incident. What appears undisputed is an incident occurred and Mr Myers said something about the claimant. The claimant was not present but heard from someone else that a comment had been made. The matter was then dealt with by someone from British Land. 37 At no point has the claimant provided any account of what he thinks Mr Myers said about him, other than it being vaguely threatening. We cannot make a definite finding of fact beyond an incident occurring and the claimant perceived this as threatening. The claimant has not proved on the balance of probabilities that any threat was actually made to him. The claimant’s mental health in 2019 38 On 25 June 2019 the claimant’s mother became concerned about the claimant’s mental health. She intervened and contacted the GP. We heard evidence from the claimant’s mother. She did not explain what triggered her intervention but spoke in more general terms. 39 The claimant was seen by his GP that day and he was prescribed anti- depressants. The GP made a referral to the mental health team. The claimant told Mr Willis about this appointment, as there is a text that day showing Mr Willis asking the claimant how it went. 40 The claimant was seen again by his GP on 2 July 2019 after work. On 15 July 2019 the claimant was seen by the mental health team. The appointment was at 2pm. A Whatsapp message from the day indicated that Mr Willis may have known about this, as he says ‘good luck’ when the claimant says he is going at 12.00pm. The claimant had a further telephone consultation with his GP during the morning of 15 August 2019. 41 On 18 September 2019 the claimant had a telephone assessment by the mental health team. This was in the morning during working hours. The claimant says that this consultation lasted for over an hour and Mr Willis would not facilitate him using a meeting room. As a result, he had to take the call in the cleaning cupboard. The claimant had a further consultation lasting about an hour when at work on 25 September 2019. 42 The claimant remained working most days throughout this time until October 2019. On a couple of occasions he overslept and he let Mr Willis know this via text message. He had a couple of days off work. In WhatsApp messages he just said he had headaches, felt bad, slept late or felt sick. 43 The medical records from these months (June-September 2019) indicate the claimant’s mental health was poor. At times the records show the claimant experiencing suicidal ideation. The claimant was prescribed anti- depressants and sleeping medication. 44 The documents from the time indicate that Mr Willis clearly knew the claimant was having some appointments. The texts indicate he knew the claimant was leaving early for appointments and the texts indicate he had some knowledge that they related to the claimant’s mental health in some way. However, we do not accept that the claimant told Mr Willis in detail the state of his mental health at that time. We do not accept that he informed Mr Willis of the medication he was on or every appointment he had. 45 The claimant and Mr Willis were close. Mr Willis confirmed this in evidence. He was sympathetic to the claimant’s personal difficulties as he had also been through the breakdown of a long term relationship, so they discussed such matters. Mr Willis understood that the claimant was struggling and having some difficulties with his mental health as a result, so was seeking medical support. We note Mr Willis also said in evidence that he noticed the claimant’s personality changing. He described him being aggressive and trying to catch people out, and having a negative outlook. Mr Willis also saw the claimant becoming unfocussed, but he attributed this to the claimant’s new relationship. From this we have concluded that Mr Willis made observations consistent with the claimant having some struggles with his mental health, and from June/July 2019 was aware of him seeking some support. However, that was the limit of his understanding about the claimant’s mental ill health at the time. The claimant’s mental health difficulties only minimally affected his work, with a couple of days off sick which were said to be for other reasons. 46 The claimant complains that when he had telephone appointments he did not have a private space at work to take the calls. Mr Willis says that the claimant could book meeting rooms if he wished, in the same way that any other employee could book a meeting room. The claimant did not do so. The evidence we saw showed the claimant had appointments during the work day on 15 August 2019, 18 September 2019 and 25 September 2019. The claimant only provided evidence of difficulty taking the call on 18 September 2019, which was the longest appointment. There was no evidence to show any difficulties other days. Overall, we concluded that the claimant was able to take the calls without difficulty the majority of the time. We also accepted Mr Willis’ explanation that the claimant could have booked a private room had he wanted to do so. There was no evidence from the claimant indicating he was unable to do this. Events of October 2019 47 According to the claimant he continued to be verbally abused by MC and others throughout this time. The three main perpetrators the claimant identified were MC, and two of MC’s colleagues, BV and MR. The claimant managed all three men. We accept that during 2019 there was probably some general animosity between the claimant and these three individuals. This is consistent with our previous finding that there had been difficulties earlier in the year with MC following the breakdown of the claimant’s marriage. We also heard from Mr Willis that the claimant did not get on well with everyone and could be critical of others. 48 The claimant has alleged that BV, one of the group he identifies as being perpetrators, threatened him in October 2019. Due to the general animosity there appears to be we accept there may have been an incident that occurred. However, we do not accept that there was a physical threat. In his evidence the claimant did not provide a clear account of what he says Mr Vasquez did that was threatening, either verbally or physically. He has just alluded to an incident but without sufficient clarity for us to understand what he says happened. The claimant has not proved on the balance of probabilities that BV threatened him physically. 49 The claimant also says that he was threatened by these three men during 2019 because of his mental ill health, as he says they knew about this. We do not accept that these three men would have been aware of the claimant’s mental ill-health during 2019. The claimant confided to some extent about how he was feeling with Mr Willis. Mr Willis was his manager and at that point they were close friends. However, the claimant only shared some limited information with Mr Willis. We do not find it credible that by September or October 2019 the claimant would have told others about his mental ill- health. 50 On 17 October 2019 the claimant says that he made a first suicide attempt at work. He says that he went to the roof of the building between 11am and 1pm and contemplated jumping off. He also said that he had discussed his suicidal thoughts with Mr Willis earlier that morning. Mr Willis did not recall any such conversation on 17 October 2019. There was no contemporaneous evidence to support this conversation having happened. The claimant in his evidence refers to texts. The texts we saw between the claimant and Mr Willis for that day were minimal and gave no indication of any suicidal thoughts or actions by the claimant. 51 In his witness evidence the claimant did provide a more detailed account of exactly what he says transpired and he describes telling Mr Willis about it after. We did not accept this was an accurate account of what occurred on 17 October 2019. The account the claimant gave in evidence was inconsistent with the contemporaneous documents. The texts that day between the claimant and Mr Willis are brief and innocuous. The following day the claimant was off work, but in his message to Mr Willis he just said had a headache and had trouble sleeping. 52 The claimant returned to work on 21 October 2019 and the texts from that day do not say anything about the claimant’s mental health. On 22 October 2019 the claimant had a telephone appointment with the mental health team. The medical notes relating to this appointment do not include any indication that the claimant was in any crisis, or that he indicated to the person treating him anything had happened of significance only 5 days earlier. 53 On 23 October 2019 the claimant says that he went to the roof again. While there he called Mr Willis. He came down, after which he spoke to Mr Willis. He said that he told Mr Willis what he had done, alluding to going to the roof with a view to jumping off. Mr Willis recalled the conversation with the claimant. However, he said that he understood that the claimant only had a thought about suicide. He said that he had not understood that the claimant had actually been on the roof. 54 We preferred Mr Willis’ account in this respect. Mr Willis only recalled there being a single incident, and we accepted that the claimant did not inform him that he had been contemplating suicide on 17 October 2019. On 23 October 2019 we accepted that Mr Willis understood that the claimant had only indicated he had contemplated suicide, not that he had actually gone to the roof to try. We have reached this conclusion as we concluded it was more consistent with the contemporaneous documentary evidence, which were the multiple messages between the claimant and Mr Willis from this time in October 2019. 55 According to the claimant he had gone to the roof around 8.00-9.00am on 23 October 2019. After he came down he spoke to Mr Willis and then he went home. It is not disputed by Mr Willis that a conversation happened and the claimant then went home. 56 Later that day the claimant and Mr Willis were in contact by WhatsApp. At 10.45am Mr Willis sent a message to the claimant asking if the claimant was alright. The claimant says that things were getting worse and “causing more stress and sickness”. Mr Willis tells the claimant to take what time he needed and not to worry about work the next day. The following day the claimant and Mr Willis engaged in lengthy discussions by WhatsApp. Mr Willis sent a particularly long message which is supportive and encouraging the claimant to rest and take what time he needs. 57 These messages over the two days indicates that Mr Willis’ understanding was that the claimant is having a bad time and is overwhelmed by his personal situation. Mr Willis refers to the claimant “going through a an extremely tough time and completely understand what you are going through. And it’s how we all would react, it’s completely normal”. 58 These messages indicate that the claimant had communicated to Mr Willis that he was struggling and feeling low. Mr Willis’ messages are consistent with this type of situation. They do not read as being messages that would be sent to someone who had informed Mr Willis they were in crisis and at immediate risk of suicide or had actually contemplated or attempted suicide. 59 The claimant went home on 23 October 2019. Mr Willis told him that he could go home, and may have told him that he should go home. Beyond that we cannot be certain about what exactly discussed. The claimant complains that he was not taken to hospital or no proactive steps were taken to ensure he got home safely. This is true, in that it is not disputed that the claimant left work and went home by himself. However, Mr Willis did send a message very shortly after the claimant left to check that he was alright. 60 The claimant was absent for several days around that time. However, he also went into work on 25 October 2019 to do his girlfriend’s work because she was sick. The claimant’s messages to Mr Willis over these days confirm he was doing that work. He does not say he was unwell and he would be absent. 61 During the evening of 28 October 2019 the claimant wrote to Mr Willis to say he would not be in the next day as he was going to the doctor. On 29 October 2019 the claimant’s GP signed him off work. This fit note was retrospective from 24 October 2019. It is only from then that that the claimant was consistently absent from work. The fit note says the claimant had anxiety and depression. 62 On 31 October 2019 Mr Willis wrote to Ms De Souza and Andrew Safo-Poku (second respondent and HR Manager) asking if there was anything he needed to do “in these exceptional circumstances”. Ms De Souza responded to say that they just needed to wait for him to return and then offer support. The claimant’s return to work in early 2020 and allegations of failure to make reasonable adjustments 63 The claimant remained signed off work with depression. He provided a medical certificate signing him off work until 15 January 2020 with depression. On 7 January 2020 Ms De Souza wrote to the claimant inviting him to a welfare meeting on 13 January 2020. The claimant responded to say that he would prefer a neutral venue closer to his home. Ms De Souza replied to the claimant saying that she would need to reschedule as she could not meet closer to his home on short notice. 64 The claimant remained off work, providing a further sick note dated 20 January 2020 which signed him off work until 16 February 2020. 65 The welfare meeting ultimately was not rescheduled. Ms De Souza accepts that the meeting was not arranged. In evidence Ms De Souza said that it should have been rescheduled but it was missed. We concluded that this was probably an oversight rather than deliberate. The claimant remained signed off work in January 2020 but he then returned to work in February 2020. The missed welfare meeting quickly became superfluous as the claimant returned to work. 66 The claimant returned to work on 17 February 2020. He had a return to work meeting with Mr Willis. The claimant makes various complaints about this process, and what he says were failings by the respondents. 67 The only meeting that occurred was the one between the claimant and Mr Willis. It is not disputed that no Occupational Health referral was made at that time and no specific risk assessment was undertaken. 68 We were provided with the written record of the return to work meeting. This is a standard form. One of the questions to be completed was whether the claimant’s illness had been as a result of an occupational injury or disease. The form is completed to say ‘no’. The notes indicate that the claimant said that he was feeling better. The final section includes a number of questions. The following are all answered ‘no’:
68.1 whether an Occupational Health referral was needed;
68.2 whether the absence was disability related; and
68.3 whether there was any reason to suspect a pattern of absence relative to particular tasks. 69 There was a question on whether there was an underlying issue or welfare need. This question is not completed either way. 70 Both the claimant and Mr Willis accept that roof access was discussed in this conversation. Mr Willis says that he asked whether it should be removed as he had a duty towards the claimant. He says the claimant reassured him that he was fine and Mr Willis took that on trust. The claimant broadly concurs with this account. He also says that he said “no, in case I still want to jump off”. We were unable to reach a definite conclusion about what was actually said in this meeting on this matter. The meeting itself took place many years ago. This aspect of the meeting was not documented the time. It is not referred to in any other documents from the time, such as Whatsapp messages. Both the claimant’s and Mr Willis’ accounts are not detailed. The most we can conclude is that roof access was mentioned briefly during the meeting, due to the claimant having mentioned it to Mr Willis before being signed off work. 71 What we also note is that at the time the claimant and Mr Willis were not just a manager and employee, they were also good friends. Before the claimant’s absence they had discussed the difficulties he was having in his personal life. They had also spoken briefly on 23 October 2019, when the claimant had gone onto the roof, albeit we concluded this was a brief discussion and Mr Willis had not fully appreciated the seriousness of the claimant’s intentions at the time. We have concluded the issue of roof access was discussed briefly at the return to work meeting. Based on the contents of the return to work form we have concluded it was not significant, as it was not recorded in there. We also accepted Mr Willis’ explanation that he mentioned it due to his concerns about the claimant and to check there was nothing he needed to do. 72 The claimant has asserted as part of this case that he asked for roof access to be removed. This is not supported by any documentary evidence from the time. Neither has the claimant in his witness evidence provided any examples of when he did this. The most we have been able to conclude is that roof access was briefly raised as an issue by Mr Willis and the claimant’s response indicated it was no longer a concern. 73 After the claimant returned to work there was no evidence from the time of him having any difficulties at work due to his mental health. The claimant continued to work until September 2020, when he was suspended. He had no absences. There are no Whatsapp messages between him and Mr Willis from that period suggesting the claimant was having difficulties. He also did not see his GP for mental health related issues again until after he was suspended. Interactions with MC and others - 2020 74 The claimant says that he continued to be subjected to verbal abuse by MC and others following his return to work. Other than the incident described below, the claimant has not provided any details within his evidence of anything that the three men said or did that he describes as being abuse. 75 An incident occurred on 13 March 2020. The claimant says that he was informed by security that MC, BV and MR were trying to encourage others to target the claimant. The claimant contacted Mr Willis. He says he informed Mr Willis his life was in danger. 76 The claimant has not set out in evidence what he understood had been said by the three men. We accept that something happened that concerned the claimant. He contacted Mr Willis and then he arranged a meeting with the three individuals the same day. That is not disputed. There is some dispute about whether Mr Willis encouraged this meeting or told the claimant not to do it. We are unsure about this, but ultimately it is not a matter we need to determine. We know a meeting did take place between the claimant and the three men. 77 We were provided with a transcript of that meeting. The claimant started the meeting by saying he knew that some people were trying to get him sacked. The claimant told those individuals he was speaking to everyone he managed. From the evidence we have seen that did not appear to be the case and he only spoke with them. During this meeting the claimant also started to talk about his private life. 78 On 16 March 2020 the three individuals raised a collective grievance against the claimant. They complain that the claimant had been following them round, not following proper procedures and getting them to do his girlfriend’s work. They also complain about the meeting he called them into on 13 March 2020. 79 Shortly after that lockdown happened. The claimant continued to work throughout lockdown but many of the first respondent’s other employees were furloughed. We understood MC and MR were placed on furlough. As a result, the claimant had no interactions with them for several months. Their grievance was also not dealt with immediately. 80 A grievance meeting for the three men was held on 8 July 2020. The three individuals met with Mr Safo-Poku and were accompanied by their trade union representative. 81 The claimant says that in July 2020 he had a conversation with Mr Willis in which he made a protected disclosure about clients being overcharged and outside areas not being covered by staff. The claimant has provided no evidence in support of this. We have no documents from the time, such as any Whatsapp messages relating to such a conversation. In his witness evidence the claimant did not provide any account of the conversation. There is no account of any such conversation, let alone details of what he said. Mr Willis in his evidence says he did not recall any such conversation. In the absence of any evidence the claimant has not provided such a meeting or discussion occurred. 82 The claimant also complains that in August 2020 he had to do a return to work meeting with an employee who had mental health problems. The context to this was furloughed employees were returning to the workplace. Mr Willis accepts that the claimant spoke with an employee who had some mental health issues. Beyond this we struggled to understand fully the claimant’s complaint in this respect because his evidence was unclear. He refers to a different employee in his evidence than he does in submissions. One is called Caterina and the other Hassan. It seems possible that the claimant carried out both meetings. 83 It was undisputed that the claimant had to carry out some return to work interviews. Mr Willis was on leave and the claimant and a colleague were required to carry out the meeting in Mr Willis’ absence. Mr Willis informed the claimant and his colleague they should share them out between themselves. That much is not disputed. There was no difference in treatment between how the claimant and his colleague were treated. They both did the same thing. There is no evidence from the time that this was a problem for the claimant. September 2020 84 On 11 September 2020 the claimant attended an informal meeting with Mr Safo-Poku and Ms De Souza. Unfortunately, we were not provided with any notes of this meeting. At this meeting the claimant was informed of the complaint that had been raised about him by MC, BV and MR. Mr Safo-Poku had spoken with the three men about their grievance but he did not interview the claimant as part of that grievance investigation to obtain the claimant’s account of events. No full explanation was provided by Mr Safo-Poku for why he did interview the claimant as part of the investigation. According to Mr Safo-Poku and Mr De Souza they wanted to find an informal solution. At the meeting on 11 September 2020 they asked the claimant to take part in mediation and provide a written apology. 85 The claimant said that during this meeting he informed Mr Safo-Poku and Ms De Souza that the three men had been bullying him. Mr Safo-Poku and Ms De Souza deny the claimant said anything along these lines at the meeting. We accept that the claimant probably did say something about how he felt he had been treated by MC, BV and MR. The meeting on 13 March 2020 had been triggered by the claimant hearing rumours about things they were saying. This is documented in the minutes of the March meeting. It’s highly unlikely that the claimant would have said nothing about his perspective of what was happening. However, the meeting in September was an informal meeting and at that point the claimant had not raised any formal complaints. The claimant did not follow up the complaints immediately after either. The most we can conclude is the claimant probably said something about how he felt about MC and the other two men, but that it was likely just in passing and not a detailed complaint. 86 On 17 September 2020 Mr Safo-Poku sent the claimant an email following up on arrangements for a mediation meeting and an apology from the claimant. Nothing further happened in relation to this immediately as other events that day superseded that process. The email is short and just dealing with the practicalities of what had been discussed in the meeting. 87 Around the same time the claimant’s girlfriend, GP, had applied for a full-time role. The claimant believed that she would be offered the job, as he said Mr Willis had told him that she would. On 17 September 2020 GP was interviewed for the role by Mr Willis. Mr Willis decided to appoint a different candidate. According to Mr Willis he knew the claimant would be upset at the decision. 88 Later that day the claimant and Mr Willis spoke. The conversation was heated. Mr Willis describes the claimant as exploding. In his witness evidence Mr Willis did not give a detailed account of what was said. However, he had written a note of the conversation at the time which he then sent to the first respondent’s HR department. One point Mr Willis recollected specifically is the claimant mentioning Mr Willis’ father, who had passed away the previous year. Mr Willis said that after his father was mentioned he switched off and did not take in the details of what else the claimant said. 89 In his witness evidence the claimant provided his own account of this incident. The claimant’s account is similar to the summary in Mr Willis’ note from the time. The main thrust of the discussion was the claimant challenging Mr Willis about GP not being offered the job, and the process that had been followed. The claimant also makes reference to having spoken about Mr Willis’ father. 90 The claimant says that during this discussion he made a protected disclosure. This he says related to the first respondent overcharging clients and outside areas not being covered by staff. In his witness evidence he said that he “mentioned I knew about his ‘fixing the waste figures’ and not telling the truth to BritishLand because of the money implications”. We accepted the claimant said something about these issues but it would have been brief and in passing. The claimant’s own account indicates that during this meeting he raised pretty much everything that was on his mind and bothering him at the time about Mr Willis and the first respondent. The claimant also mentioned this issue in the investigation meeting he attended with Mr Monderville on 22 September 2020. Mr Willis’ account is that the claimant effectively launched into a tirade attacking him. We also accept that Mr Willis did not take in every detail of what the claimant said due to the level of attack and the fact the claimant raised his father. 91 The claimant also said he made protected acts as he mentioned his mental health and threats made by others towards him. In his own account of events the claimant says that he had been telling Mr Willis about the threats he said were being made, specifically referencing BV. In his account of events in his witness evidence the claimant does not link this to his mental health or absence due to his depression, he just refers to threats. 92 After the meeting finished the claimant left work. The claimant says he asked to leave and Mr Willis said he could. Mr Willis says that the claimant just left without asking permission. We find that given what had happened in the heat of the moment the claimant probably did not ask if he could leave, but instead just went. 93 Mr Willis reported what had happened to Ms De Souza and Mr Safo-Poku the same day. Later the same day Ms De Souza called the claimant and informed him that he was suspended pending an investigation into two allegations. The first was about inappropriate behaviour in relation to the meeting with Mr Willis earlier that day. The second allegation was that he had left site without authorisation. 94 The claimant’s girlfriend was suspended the same day. The claimant and his girlfriend had left site at the same time. The girlfriend had actually finished her shift by that time, but an error had been made. The GP was interviewed by Louis Monerville, on 21 September 2020 and the situation was cleared up and she was reinstated. Suspension and investigation 95 Louis Monerville, an Account Manager with the first respondent, was appointed to investigate the incidents on 17 September 2020. On 18 September 2020 Mr Monerville sent the claimant a letter inviting him to an investigation on 22 September 2020. 96 The meeting was in person on 22 September 2020. We were provided with a recording of that meeting along with a transcript, so were able to get a good sense of what occurred. 97 During the meeting Mr Monerville took the claimant through what had happened on 17 September 2020 and obtained the claimant’s account of events. The claimant referred to the incidents in October 2019 when he said he had considered jumping off the roof. Mr Monerville asked the claimant more about his mental health and the medication he was on and what they were for. To that extent the claimant’s mental health was discussed at the meeting. 98 The claimant says that during this meeting Mr Monerville was aggressive, shouted at him and made attacks on the claimant’s mental health. Mr Monerville did ask the claimant some questions about his mental health. At times his questions were potentially a bit clumsy. However, it is also clear that the questions were being asked as part of an investigation to gain an understanding of what happened on 17 September. This included trying to gain an understanding of how the claimant’s state of mind may have been a factor. Having listened to the recording, we concluded that Mr Monerville did not attack the claimant’s mental health. 99 During the meeting the claimant spoke about his mental health to Mr Monerville. Based on the evidence we saw we have concluded that before then the claimant had disclosed very little to anyone employed by the first respondent about his mental health. The claimant had been signed off work at the end of 2019 and before then had a few discussions with Mr Willis. The claimant then returned to work in February 2020 and worked without any further significant absences until his suspension. There was no evidence he had said anything to anyone else, other than Mr Willis. There was also no evidence from the time that the claimant discussed his mental health with Mr Willis after the return to work meeting in February 2020. Therefore, the meeting with Mr Monerville was effectively the first time the claimant had opened up about his mental health and events of Oct 2019 to anyone other than Mr Willis. 100 In terms of the discussion itself, we heard the recording. At times the discussion did become slightly heated. At times the claimant was quite argumentative which lead to Mr Monerville and the claimant speaking over each other. However, we did not observe Mr Monerville having shouted or being aggressive. 101 The claimant was sent notes of the meeting the following day. These were not verbatim and omitted certain parts of the discussion. We were provided with the transcript and the notes that were provided at the time and can see there were differences. In the official notes there was some reference to the claimant’s mental health but much of the detail has been left out. The account in the notes of the discussion about events of October 2019 is much briefer and does not reflect what the claimant said about how bad his state of mind was at that time. There was far less detail about the claimant’s treatment for his mental health at that time. Grievance 102 The claimant first drafted his grievance on 18 September 2020. The first respondent witnesses said they did not receive it on that day. We concluded that the claimant drafted the grievance then but did not send it then. 103 On 24 September 2020 the claimant did send a grievance to Mr Safo-Poku. In this the claimant complains about a number of matters that had occurred during 2019 and 2020. He expressly refers to the Equality Act 2010 and says he has been treated less favourably because of his mental health disability. 104 On 24 September 2020 the claimant also raised a second grievance. This was about the events of 17 September 2020, being suspended and the subsequent investigation meeting on 22 September 2020. 105 On 28 September 2020 the claimant raised a third grievance. This was almost identical to the first grievance. 106 On 28 September 2020 Mr Safo-Poku wrote to the claimant to invite him to a grievance meeting. 107 On 30 September 2020 the claimant raised a fourth grievance. This was about a historic complaints that he had been underpaid in respect of holiday pay in 2016. 108 On 1 October 2020 the claimant attended a grievance investigation meeting with Mr Safo-Poku. We were provided with minutes of this meeting. At this meeting the claimant was able to explain his complaints in more detail. This covered a number of different issues, including much of what the claimant has complained about within this case. 109 The claimant says he made a protected disclosure during this meeting about misleading waste reports to clients. In the claimant’s second grievance he describes himself as a whistleblower, so Mr Safo-Poku asked whether one point that was being discussed was the subject the claimant was whistleblowing about. The claimant responded that it was not. Later on during the discussion the notes indicate the claimant saying “I also mentioned about waste figures, but I was not happy to sign the figures and I told him I will only be honest”. This was in the context of the claimant providing his account of the conversation with Mr Willis on 17 September 2020. It is likely that the minutes of this meeting are not verbatim. Mr Safo-Poku sent the claimant minutes of the meeting. On 13 October 2020 the claimant sent Ms Safo Poku some detailed comments. In this email the claimant said “I mentioned to Kenny that had been forging the waste figures and I would never do this.” 110 In the meeting the claimant raised that BV had threatened him physically. In the follow up email the claimant elaborated on this, stating “I mentioned I was threatened twice by Borja – by Sierra 6 and 350 reception and both times reported straight away to Kenny who said he was dealing”. 111 Later in October 2020 the first respondent sent a letter for MC to the claimant’s address. The claimant says that MC came to his house to get the letter and confronted him. The claimant says that the MC taunted him and told him he was going to be dismissed. The claimant says that he reported this to the respondent and they failed to investigate this allegation that he had been threatened by MC. The claimant provided no evidence of having reported any incident to the respondent in October 2020. In his witness evidence he did not identify who he told, what he said or when. The claimant was in contact with Mr Safo-Poku at the time and raised 2 further grievances on 22 October 2020. There is nothing within any of the correspondence we saw that included an allegation of the claimant being threatened by MC in October 2020. 112 On 22 October 2020 the claimant’s girlfriend raised a grievance. Part of this relates to the conduct of MC towards her in the workplace. 113 On 22 October 2020 the claimant raised his fifth and sixth grievances. His fifth related to sick pay from 2018 when the claimant had injured his ankle when playing in a work-related football match. The sixth grievance related data protection matters connected to use of the claimant’s image in 2013 in corporate material. The claimant was concerned his picture was still viewable online, even though he had asked for it to be removed in 2015. 114 On 4 December 2020 the claimant received an outcome to his grievances from Mr Safo-Poku. This letter refers to five grievances. The summary of what the grievances are indicates the respondent treated the third grievance as a duplicate. 115 Mr Safo Poku noted that some grievances were historic so it was not possible to investigate all of those grievances. Mr Safo Poku also explained that some concerns related to the ongoing suspension and disciplinary investigation which was a separate process. However, he had considered the complaints about the investigation meeting with Mr Monerville. 116 The majority of the grievance was not upheld. There were a couple of points that were partially upheld or the claimant’s point of view was acknowledged. Mr Safo-Poku noted that Mr Willis had accepted that on 17 February 2020 he had asked the claimant if his roof access should be removed and he apologised if the claimant thought it was said as a joke. Mr Safo-Poku also accepted that the welfare meeting had not been rearranged in January 2020, although he concluded this was due to the claimant being about to return to work so he would have a meeting with his manager in any event. Some of the complaints about holiday pay were upheld and the claimant was informed he would receive that in due course. 117 The claimant specifically complains in this case that Mr Safo-Poku concluded that the claimant had not been threatened at work. Reading the outcome letter, this is not the conclusion Mr Safo-Poku reached. He had spoken to Mr Willis who said he could not recall the claimant reporting a threat by BV. Mr Safo-Poku concluded there was not enough evidence to reach a conclusion either way. 118 On 8 December 2020 the claimant raised a seventh grievance. This was against Mr Safo-Poku and related to the grievance process. It was sent to John Conry Jr, the fourth respondent and the first respondent’s Managing Director. 119 On 14 December 2020 the claimant was sent a letter inviting him to a disciplinary hearing on 18 December 2020. This related to the allegations about the claimant’s conduct on 17 September 2020. 120 On 15 December 2020 the claimant raised an appeal against the grievance outcome. This was sent to Mr Conry. The letter was very lengthy and he appealed every finding made by Mr Safo-Poku. Within this letter the claimant expressly refers to discrimination. 121 On 15 December 2020 Mr Conry forwarded the appeal to Mr Safo-Poku and Amalia Demain (the fifth respondent and an HR Manager). They were both in the HR department. 122 The disciplinary hearing had been due to take place on 18 December 2020. On 15 December Sam Fletcher, who was the manger who was due to hear the disciplinary, wrote to the claimant postponing the hearing to a later date. This was due to an unconnected incident which meant resources needed to be diverted. 123 A hearing for the grievance appeal and seventh grievance was initially arranged for 23 December 2020. This meeting was postponed. 124 The hearing eventually went ahead on 7 January 2021. It was chaired by Donna Chadbourne. She was an external consultant. Mr Conry explained she was brought in because he had made allegations against a number of different individuals. 125 The meeting was lengthy. We were provided with a transcript of this hearing, though we did not hear any evidence from Ms Chadbourne. The claimant’s own evidence of this hearing was limited, but he did not suggest that the transcript was unreliable. 126 Ms Chadbourne started by asking the claimant about what he had described at the time as whistleblowing. The claimant was able to explain his concerns. Ms Chadbourne then said that she was happy with what he had said about that and would move on. The claimant did not indicate at the time that he had more to explain. 127 Ms Chadbourne asked the claimant to provide more information about his allegations that he had been subjected to threats and rumours were being spread. The claimant provided details of individuals he said were witnesses. During this meeting the claimant provided some information about the relatively recent incidents when he said that MC had come to his house and threatened him. The threat referred to was about the claimant being dismissed. 128 On reading the transcript of the meeting, we could see that the claimant seemed to switch rapidly between talking about events that occurred in the past, such as the incidents involving BV, and more recent events such as when he said MC came to his house and threatened his job. Reading with hindsight, based on the claim as presented, we can see that the claimant is referring to separate matters. At the time though it would not have been clear. During the meeting the claimant did not set out a clear account of what he says occurred in October 2020 that could be investigated as a new allegation. 129 During the meeting Ms Chadbourne also asked the claimant about other aspects of his grievance and appeal of the earlier grievance outcome. This included the matters that he had previously raised about discrimination. 130 At the end of the meeting Ms Chadbourne discusses what could happen next with the claimant. She asks the claimant if he would like more contact from the business, to which he said he would. Ms Chadbourne also raised the issue of mediation to move forward. The claimant was asked if he wanted to add anything and a few additional matters were discussed. 131 On 19 January 2021 Ms Chadbourne sent the notes of the meeting to the claimant. She asked the claimant to provide her some documents that he had previously sent Mr Conry. She also asked for any recordings he may have made of other meetings. 132 In late January 2021 the claimant sent a number of emails to Ms Chadbourne with further information. This included on 26 January 2021 additional information about some more recent matters. Ms Delmian was copied into this email and the claimant directed a comment to her about the police speaking to her about a situation involving his girlfriend and to arrange to speak to Mr Willis, BV and MC. 133 On 27 January 2021 Ms Chadbourne wrote to the claimant to say that her remit was only to look into the matters he raised in his seventh grievance and grievance appeal. The claimant responds to this, clearly upset, saying that the first respondent had not investigated his claims even though he was still providing more evidence. 134 On this we note that our understanding is that the claimant is referring to his complaints about being threatened by BV and MC. At this time the claimant repeated certain allegations, but they remain vague and unparticularised. We did not see any additional concrete evidence about these allegations that was provided by the claimant to the first respondent at this time. 135 On 29 January 2021 Ms Chadbourne wrote to the claimant with the outcome of the seventh grievance against Mr Safo-Poku. The majority was not upheld. There were a couple of points that were partially upheld. In relation to the allegations of bullying by MC, BV and MR, she upheld the decision not to investigate allegations about events during 2019 because it was too long ago so would not be fair. In relation to his whistleblowing, Ms Chadbourne confirmed that the company was investigating the matters he had raised but this was a separate process. 136 On 1 February 2021 Ms Chadbourne wrote to the claimant with the outcome of the appeal against the original grievance decision. This letter is very long and thorough, running to 32 pages in total. Ms Chadbourne went through everything she has considered in detail, referring to evidence that the claimant had provided. Some points are partially upheld, others not upheld at all. Overall, the conclusions are in line with the original grievance outcome. 137 We noted the following three specific points in Ms Chadbourne’s decision:
137.1 The claimant had provided 13 appendices which he said was evidence that Mr Willis knew he was being verbally abused by MC and others. Ms Chadbourne went through those individually and concluded none of them showed that Mr Willis was aware of anything that the claimant alleged had happened.
137.2 Ms Chadbourne had asked the claimant about his relationship with Mr Willis and whether he wanted mediation. The claimant said he did want mediation in order to go back to work. Ms Chadbourne recommends that mediation should happen, but just between the claimant and Mr Willis.
137.3 Ms Chadbourne recommended that the disciplinary officer looked carefully at the evidence that had been gathered and decide whether a disciplinary process should actually go ahead.
137.4 On the issue of sick pay, Ms Chadbourne stated that the company sometimes pays full pay to employees with physical ill-health but does not for mental ill-health conditions. 138 On 5 February 2021 Sam Fletcher wrote to the claimant to inform him that the disciplinary investigation had been concluded and that no action was being taken. On 9 February 2021 Ms Demian emailed the claimant to confirm this. She also advised that following the grievance outcome mediation with Mr Willis was an option. Ms Demian informed the claimant he would remain on full pay until that has been arranged. Ms Demian also said the respondent was suggesting mediation with other individuals who were named in the grievance. The claimant was asked to confirm if he was happy to proceed with mediation by 12 February 2021. 139 The claimant responded to Ms Demian to say that he was finding everything stressful. He asked for clarification about how he would return to the business and what support he would need. On 12 February 2021 Ms Demian sent an email to the claimant explaining what the mediation would entail. On 18 February 2021 Ms Demian asked the claimant to respond by 19 February 2021. She also advised that if he did not respond by then he may be viewed as AWOL. The claimant responded to say he would proceed with the mediation. Mediation March 2021 140 On 23 February 2021 Mr Safo-Poku contacted Mr Willis and informs him that a mediation would be set up with him and the claimant. He asks for Mr Willis’ assistance setting that up mediation with MC, MV and another individual called Mariusz Jaworski, who was different to MR. 141 On 25 February 2021 Mr Safo-Poku sent an update to Mr Conry about the situation. This set out the details of the mediation that had been planned for the first week of March. This email indicates that mediation will be with Mr Willis but also with Mr Safo-Poku, Ms De Souza, BV and Mr Jaworkski, but not Mr Cwik as he had declined. This is the first time that mediation between the claimant and others is clearly set out. However, we noted that mediation with MC, BV and MR had been proposed in September following their grievance, but this had never taken place. We have inferred that this was the reason they were included. However, the claimant had not been informed this was still proposed. 142 We did not understand why the claimant was required to attend mediation with Mr Safo-Poku and Ms De Souza. There was no explanation of this decision in the documents or witness evidence. The claimant did not work with them on a day to day basis and therefore there was no clear reason why that was necessary in order for him to return to work in Regents Place or elsewhere. We also note the following:
142.1 The decision to involve Mr Safo-Poku in the mediation was perplexing, given the limited scope of the grievance against him and the fact that the claimant would otherwise have very limited dealings with him when working. We also note that as a member of the HR team Mr Safo-Poku could be expected to have a level of resilience to criticism from unhappy employees.
142.2 While Ms De Souza was part of the claimant’s line management structure he had little day to day interaction with her. The grievances against Ms De Souza were not personal in any way either. They mainly relating to errors in payments over the years and some of these were upheld. 143 At the end of this email Mr Safo-Poku said “Once these meeting has been held we will be able to proceed with SOSR process (Sam will be chairing this process with Amalia assisting) which should commence with the week starting 8 March 2021”. In evidence Mr Safo-Poku suggested that this should not be read as indicating that they were considering dismissal and it was about other potential internal processes. We did not accept Mr Safo-Poku’s explanation as credible. Taking the email on face value it was clear to us that the respondent was already considering dismissal as an option. 144 Ms Demian wrote to the claimant on 25 February 2025 setting out the details of the mediation. This was the first time the claimant had been informed that mediation was not just with Mr Willis, but also with Mr Safo-Poku, Ms De Souza, BV and Mr Jaworski. 145 The claimant entered into some correspondence with Ms Demian about the mediation. She informed him who would be there, and that she will be present. The claimant asked if the mediation could be in person, rather than online. At no point does he ask to be able to bring a companion. 146 The first mediation meetings took place on 3 and 4 March 2021. On 3 March the claimant attended mediation with Mr Safo-Poku. Mr Fletcher chaired and Ms Demian was present. On 4 March 2021 the claimant attended mediation with Ms De Souza, again chaired by Mr Fletcher and with Ms Demian present. The claimant did not have a companion with him at either. We note that there was no evidence that he had requested one either, but neither did the respondent offer this as an option. 147 The claimant complains that Mr Fletcher did not ensure the meetings were neutral, his mental health was attacked and he was put down and not listened to. We were provided with transcripts of both meetings so had a complete account of what occurred. 148 Our findings about the mediation with Mr Safo-Poku are as follows:
148.1 Nothing is said about the claimant’s mental health that could be viewed as negative or an ‘attack’. The claimant’s mental health is barely referred to during the meeting. The only discussion is with Mr Fletcher, who asks the claimant about how that will impact him returning to work, with the suggestion that support needs to be looked at.
148.2 To an extent the claimant indicated he did not fully accept Ms Chadbourne’s conclusions, but he also clearly indicates he is willing to put things behind him and move on. He says clearly that he understands that Mr Safo-Poku was upset. He is also focussed on the future. For example, he says “I’m not going to sit here and make a fuss about it. I’m just trying to go forward and improve the relationship.”
148.3 Mr Safo-Poku does not appear willing to put things behind him. He was very focussed on how he felt about the grievance. The claimant’s grievance against Ms Safo-Poku did not make serious allegations. The claimant labelled his complaint as victimisation and referred to the Equality Act 2010. However, the substance of the complaints mainly related to how the grievance had been handled on a practical level, such as not providing notes of meetings in a timely manner. However, the way that Mr Safo-Poku portrays the grievance during the mediation is at odds with that. For example, Mr Safo-Poku suggests that the allegations were so serious they could be career ending or could even be criminal.
148.4 Mr Safo-Poku appeared unwilling to engage and move forward. To that extent he was not listening to the claimant. He reiterated repeatedly how he felt about the grievance. There was nothing within what he said during the mediation that indicates Mr Safo-Poku was willing or able to understand the claimant’s position. 149 The mediation with Ms De Souza took place on 4 March 2021. We have also seen the transcript of that mediation. We found nothing untoward about what occurred. Both the claimant and Ms De Souza were able to explain how they felt. Ms De Souza was clearly focussed on what would happen in the future. She expressed concern about trust and that this would need to be rebuilt. However, she clearly engaged with what the claimant said and indicated that she thinks it is possible to rebuild their relationship. The claimant’s mental health is barely referred to and nothing is said that could be described as an attack. Neither does Ms De Souza say anything that could be viewed as putting the claimant down. Overall, the transcript of this meeting reads as a productive, forward looking mediation. 150 No other mediations took place. On 3 March 2021 Ms Demian wrote to the claimant to say that the mediation with BV, Mr Willis and Mr Jaworski would need to be rescheduled until the following week. 151 The claimant was then signed off work for a month from 8 March 2021 with anxiety and recurrent depression. 152 On 8 March 2021 the claimant wrote to Ms Demian to say he was not well enough for the mediations that had been rescheduled for that day. The claimant expressed his perspective about the mediation and said it felt like “another opportunity to attack/bully me making it very stressful and unfair on myself”. He does not mention his mental health in this email other than generally saying the process has been stressful. 153 On 15 March 2021 Ms Demian writes to the claimant to confirm he will receive SSP. She also asked the claimant to provide some more information about how he felt about the mediation and why. Ms Demian asked whether he would like support from the respondent. 154 On 8 April 2021 Ms Demian wrote to the claimant to ask if he was fit to continue with the mediation. The claimant responded to say that he was back to work, meaning that he was no longer signed off as unfit. On 12 April 2021 Ms Demian writes to the claimant asking whether he still wanted to attend a second mediation with Ms De Souza. She also asks him to respond to the queries she had sent on 15 March 2021. 155 The claimant responded with a lengthy email going over a number of the events over the previous months, which he was still not happy about. 156 On 16 April 2021 the claimant wrote again to Ms Demian. He asks if he is allowed to speak to others at Regent’s Place, given that the suspension was lifted in February. Ms Demian responded to this email. She asked if the claimant felt mediation had been unsuccessful and he did not wish to continue. She asked what other support the claimant needed to return to work. She concludes with a proposed return to work date of 26 April 2021. She does not respond to the claimant’s question about speaking to others at Regents Place. 157 On 19 April 2021 Ms Demian chases up a response to that email and asks for a response by 12pm the next day. Ms Demian claimant writes to the claimant again on 22 April 2021 asking for a response. She says “I will take your silence on the matter that you no longer wish to discuss or continue the mediation”. She confirms he is expected back at work on 26 April 2021. 158 Attached to the email was a letter from Mr Fletcher. This said that the claimant had been required to attend mediation with 5 individuals. The respondent said that the mediation was due to “relationship breakdown between parties due to allegations being raised by you throughout your investigation”. Mr Fletcher stated that the claimant had failed to make himself available for the mediation so they had decided he did not want to proceed. We note here that the claimant had not any point said that he did not wish to mediate. He had corresponded with Ms Demian setting out his concerns about what had occurred in the March mediations. Ms Demian did not properly respond to these concerns or offer any reassurances about what would happen at the next mediations. 159 The claimant responded later that day, 22 April 2022. He challenged that the mediation had been described as a requirement, rather than optional. He set out various other concerns about the mediation process. The claimant also set out some suggestions of the support that could be provided to assist him back to work. This is in response to Ms Demian saying he will return to work on 26 April 2022. Meeting 26 April 2021 160 In the preceding few days Ms Demian had been liaising with other individuals obtaining statements about the claimant. Ms Demian said in her evidence “she became aware that once the claimant’s colleagues knew that he would be returning to work soon they became alarmed and were not happy about it”. This is why she asked for statements. When asked about this in evidence she said she had been instructed to do this by Mr Safo-Poku. 161 In oral evidence none of the respondent’s witnesses provided a full account of what happened and none of them would take responsibility for making the decision to obtain these statements. No one was able to explain how it was anyone became aware of possible difficulties with the claimant returning to work. There were some emails between Ms Demian and Mr Willis from 20 April 2021 which clearly indicated that this had already been discussed at that point. Mr Willis gave a statement and he also spoke with MR and BV, who provided statements. Mr Safo-Poku and Ms De Souza also provided statements. We noted in the evidence the statement by Mr Safo-Poku was anonymised but it was clearly by him as it referred to mediation. These were all made on 21 and 22 April 2021. The statements are universally negative, all saying the individuals are unwilling to work with the claimant. 162 In the absence of a credible alternative explanation, we concluded that it was likely that this process is what was being referred to by Mr Safo-Poku in his earlier email referencing an SOSR process. It appears to have been a ‘plan B’ if mediation was not successful. Essentially, the respondent had already decided before the mediation happened that they would be taking statements from individuals the claimant worked with. 163 On 23 April 2021 Ms Demian responds to the claimant’s email and informs him he was required to report to Head Office on 26 April 2021. Ms Demian said this was due to “the content of your email”. In fact, Ms Demian had already been gathering statements from others about the claimant in the days before she heard back from the claimant. 164 The claimant attended the meeting on 26 April 2021. It was chaired by Sam Fletcher with Mr Demian also in attendance. The claimant was not accompanied and had not been told he could have anyone with him. 165 At the meeting Mr Fletcher told the claimant they had received statements from colleagues expressing their concern about the claimant returning to work. Mr Fletcher read out the statements. He then informed the claimant there was a relationship breakdown so they would be removing him from Regent’s Place while that process was managed. Mr Fletcher says that they would be triggering a mobility clause in the claimant’s contract. We were provided with a script for the meeting which indicated that alternative roles would be considered. The minutes of the actual meeting do not include this. Mr Fletcher did not explain to the claimant what would happen next. 166 Ms Demian sent the claimant an email later that day with the minutes and a letter attached. The letter we saw was dated 25 April 2022 and had details missing. The letter reiterates the same points as the notes of the meeting. There is no explanation of what process the first respondent intended to follow next. The letter states that the claimant will be required to attend another meeting but the date and time are left blank. There is a general warning at the end that the claimant’s employment may be terminated if they have no alternative employment that can be considered. 167 The claimant was signed off work again from 29 April 2021. This was with depressive disorder. During May 2021 the claimant remains in contact with Ms Demian. This correspondence mainly relates to the claimant’s sick pay. The claimant only received SSP at this time. 168 On 2 June 2021 the claimant wrote to Ms Demian to say he was fit to work. He asked why he was not allowed to contact friends or colleagues and asks whether this is fair. 169 Ms Demian writes to the claimant on 4 June 2020 informing the claimant they would like to refer him to Occupational Health. The claimant responded on 7 June saying that an Occupational Health referral should have been made the previous year when he returned from his first period of absence. He confirmed he would attend the Occupational Health assessment. Ms Demian wrote again on 9 June 2020 to say that they had never prevented him from being in contact with colleagues with whom he also had personal relationships. Further grievance 170 On 14 June 2021 the claimant raises a further grievance (Grievance 8). This is sent directly to Mr Conry. Some of this reiterates the complaints he had made previously that were addressed by Ms Chadbourne. He also complained about events since, including the mediation and meeting of 26 April 2021. At various points in the letter the claimant referred to the Equality Act 2010 and said he was being treated less favourably in relation to his mental health. 171 This grievance was acknowledged by Mr Conry. Mr Conry copied in Mr Safo- Poku and Ms Demian to the response, but the grievance was not attached. 172 On 16 June 2021 the claimant emails Mr Conry asking for the details of his line manager. He said that he felt that the company was not following its own procedures so he wanted to escalate his grievance to them. 173 On 17 June 2021 the claimant sent a further grievance to Ian Leeding, Mr Conry’s manager (Grievance 9). This is about how Mr Conry was handling the grievance including the fact that Mr Conry had copied Mr Safo- Poku and Ms Demian into an email. He says this is victimisation. 174 Mr Conry arranged a grievance meeting with the claimant. It was due to be held on 1 July 2021 but Mr Conry postponed it the day before. 175 The claimant was reviewed by Occupational Health on 5 July 2021. Occupational Health said that the claimant was fit to return to work and to attend meetings. They did flag up that he would benefit from having someone accompany him to meetings. They confirmed that he was still suffering from depression and he would probably be disabled under the Equality Act 2010. 176 According to Mr Conry, on 7 July 2021 he was contacted by British Land who said they had received a letter from the claimant via their whistleblowing policy. The claimant’s letter to British Land reiterated many of the same complaints he had raised since September 2020. 177 The claimant attended a grievance meeting with Mr Conry on 14 July 2021. The claimant was accompanied at this meeting. At the beginning of the meeting Mr Conry made it clear that he was not going to revisit matters which had been dealt with by Ms Chadbourne. 178 At the end of the meeting Mr Conry said that it “could be perceived as a breakdown between yourself and the company” and he asked the claimant if that could be fixed. The claimant said he was trying to fix it and that was why he raised a grievance. He said he wanted to be treated fairly. 179 At no point during this meeting does Mr Conry say anything about the claimant’s letter to British Land that he had found out about the week before. Ms Demian wrote to the claimant on 15 July 2021 informing him they had been contacted by British Land. This was a short letter seeking consent to discuss him with British Land. 180 On 16 July 2021 wrote to Mr Conry (Grievance 10). In this letter he set out more detail of the evidence he said he had provided in support of his complaints. Dismissal 181 On 30 July 2021 Conry wrote to the claimant informing him that he was dismissed with immediate effect. The claimant was paid in lieu of 9 weeks’ notice. 182 At this point there had been no further meeting between Mr Conry and the claimant. Mr Conry had not provided an outcome to the grievance by this point. This letter terminating the claimant’s employment effectively came ‘out of the blue’. 183 In the letter Mr Conry refers to multiple issues. This includes the following:
183.1 the claimant’s grievances and Mr Conry’s perception that he remained dissatisfied with the outcomes;
183.2 the claimant’s ill health, with Mr Conry suggesting that the first respondent had tried to seek clarity about this and the support he needed;
183.3 the mediation;
183.4 the Occupational Health report and concerns about the claimant returning to work with Mr Willis;
183.5 Mr Conry said they had considered redeployment but they could not identify an alternative role.
183.6 the claimant’s letter to British Land; and
183.7 in conclusion Mr Conry says there has been an irretrievable breakdown in the relationship. 184 We were provided with no evidence of anyone within the first respondent actually looking to see if the claimant could be redeployed or if there were possible vacancies at sites other than Regents Place. In oral evidence none of the respondents’ witnesses who may have been involved in such a process could confirm they had done this. Mr Conry said that he thought Ms De Souza looked for other roles but she denied this. The claimant however provided evidence of a number of vacancies with the respondent that were being externally advertised in late July 2021. These were more junior roles, such as cleaning supervisor positions, but were never discussed with the claimant. 185 We also note that at no point had the respondent undertaken any active process to discuss the claimant’s mental health with him and what support he may require. There were a few emails where Ms Demian asked about what support he may need, but these queries were limited to particular contexts. In April 2021, before the 26 April 2021 meeting, the claimant directly asked Ms Demian what the company proposed to facilitate his return to work including the support he may need. Instead of holding a meeting to discuss how to facilitate the claimant’s return the first respondent started what was is described as an SOSR process, informing him of the complaints by others on 26 April 2021. 186 The claimant appealed against dismissal on 10 August 2021. In this he set out his position on what had been said in the dismissal letter. On 18 August 2021 Mr Conry responded to the claimant to say his appeal would not be considered because the dismissal was due to the fundamental breakdown in trust and confidence so the ACAS code of practice did not apply. 187 On 27 August 2021 Mr Conry wrote to the claimant with the outcome to his grievance. Miscellaneous findings of fact 188 Within the claimant’s case he pursues a number of claims that the respondent failed to make reasonable adjustments. Some of the relevant findings of fact are set out above. However, there are a number of claims which do not clearly fit into the chronology of events. These broadly relate to general day to day arrangements and working practice. These include claims about fixed work start times, tasks such as cleaning checks beside the road and provision of laptops. 189 It is not clearly set out in his evidence when it was that the claimant says various PCPs applied nor when he was placed at a disadvantage. However, we note that the claimant was suspended on 17 September 2020 and did not return to work. Therefore, these allegations must relate to either the period of time before the claimant was signed off work in October 2019 or the period between February 2020 and September 2020. 190 The claimant provided very little evidence about these matters. He has not clearly set out what the situation was or why this placed him at a disadvantage. There is also no contemporaneous documents that indicate that the claimant had any issues with start times, laptops, or undertaking cleaning checks. 191 During oral evidence the claimant alluded to difficulties he felt at the time relating to his mental health linked to some of these issues. However, there was still no clear evidence on which we could make any findings about what happened. The claimant’s descriptions were general in nature, rather than any clear account of anything that had happened. There was also no evidence that he communicated these details to anyone, including Mr Willis. The Law 192 The Claims pursued by the Claimant are:
192.1 detriment on the grounds of having made a protected disclosure (section 47B Employment Rights Act 1996);
192.2 automatically unfair dismissal due to having made a protected disclosure (section Employment Rights Act 1996);
192.3 unfair dismissal – ordinary unfair dismissal (section 98 Employment Rights Act 1996);
192.4 direct disability discrimination (section 13 Equality Act 2010);
192.5 failure to make reasonable adjustments (section 20-21 Equality Act 2010);
192.6 harassment on the grounds of disability (section 27 Equality Act 2010);
192.7 victimisation (section 27 Equality Act 2010);
192.8 unlawful deduction of wages (section 13 Employment Rights Act 1996)/breach of contract;
192.9 holiday pay under the Working Time Regulations 1998; and
192.10 breach of the right to be accompanied (section 10 Employment Relations Act 1999). Disability 193 Section 6 Equality Act 2010 provides:

(1) A person (P) has a disability if –

(a) P has a physical or mental impairment, and
(b) the impairment has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on P’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities. 194 The Guidance on matters to be taken into account in determining questions relating to the definition of disability states this at A3 in relation to the meaning of an impairment: “The definition requires that the effects which a person may experience must arise from a physical or mental impairment. The term mental or physical impairment should be given its ordinary meaning. It is not necessary for the cause of the impairment to be established, nor does the impairment have to be the result of an illness. In many cases, there will be no dispute whether a person has an impairment. Any disagreement is more likely to be about whether the effects of the impairment are sufficient to fall within the definition and in particular whether they are long-term. Even so, it may sometimes be necessary to decide whether a person has an impairment so as to be able to deal with the issues about its effects.” 195 At A5 the Guidance gives examples of impairments and these include “mental health conditions with symptoms such as anxiety, low mood, panic attacks” and “mental illnesses such as depression”. 196 In J v DLA Piper UK LLP [2010] ICR 1052 EAT, Underhill P (as he then was) set out the following principles in relation to the definition of “impairment”: “The first point concerns the legitimacy in principle of the kind of distinction made by the tribunal, as summarised at para 33(3) above, between two states of affairs which can produce broadly similar symptoms: those symptoms can be described in various ways, but we will be sufficiently understood if we refer to them as symptoms of low mood and anxiety. The first state of affairs is a mental illness – or, if you prefer, a mental condition – which is conveniently referred to as “clinical depression” and is undoubtedly an impairment within the meaning of the act. The second is not characterised as a mental condition at all but simply as a reaction to adverse circumstances (such as problems at work) or – if the jargon may be forgiven – “adverse life events”. We dare say that the value or validity of that distinction could be questioned at the level of deep theory, and even if it is accepted in principle the borderline between the two states of affairs is bound often to be very blurred in practice. But we are equally clear that it reflects a distinction which is routinely made by clinicians…and which should in principle be recognised for the purposes of the Act. We accept it may be a difficult distinction to apply in a particular case; and the difficulty can be exacerbated by the looseness with which some medical professionals, and most lay people, use such terms as “depression” (“clinical” or otherwise), “anxiety” and “stress”. Fortunately, however, we would not expect those difficulties often to cause a real problem in the context of a claim under the Act. This is because of the long-term effect requirement. If, as we recommend at para 40(2), a tribunal starts by considering the adverse effect issue and finds that the claimant’s ability to carry out normal day to day activities has been substantially impaired by symptoms characteristic of depression for 12 months or more, it would in most cases be likely to conclude that he or she was indeed suffering “clinical depression” rather than simply a reaction to adverse circumstances: it is a common sense observation that such reactions are not normally long-lived.” 197 In Herry v Dudley Metropolitan Council [2017] ICR 610, HHJ Richardson, said this: “56 Although reactions to adverse circumstances are indeed not normally long-lived, experience shows that there is a class of case where a reaction to circumstances perceived as adverse can become entrenched; where the person concerned will not give way or compromise over an issue at work, and refuses to return to work, yet in other respects suffers no or little apparent adverse effect on normal day-to-day activities. A doctor may be more likely to refer to the presentation of such an entrenched position as stress than as anxiety or depression. An employment tribunal is not bound to find that there is a mental impairment in such a case. Unhappiness with a decision or a colleague, a tendency to nurse grievances, or a refusal to compromise (if these or similar findings are made by an employment tribunal) are not of themselves mental impairments; they may simply reflect a person’s character or personality. Any medical evidence in support of a diagnosis of mental impairment must of course be considered by an employment tribunal with great care; so much any evidence of adverse effect over and above an unwillingness to return to work until an issue is resolved to the employee’s satisfaction, but in the end the question whether there is a mental impairment is one for the employment tribunal to assess.” 198 A “substantial” adverse effect is one that is “more than minor or trivial” (s. 212(1) EqA 2010). In determining whether an effect on normal day to day activities is substantial, a Tribunal should have regard to the time taken to carry out the activity (Guidance [B2]) and the way in which the activity is carried out (Guidance [B3]). 199 “Normal day-to-day activities” are things that people do on a regular or daily basis (Guidance [D2]), such as shopping, reading, writing, having a conversation, using the telephone, watching television, getting washed and dressed, preparing and eating food, carrying out household tasks, walking and travelling by various forms of transport and taking part in social activities. They do not include activities which are only normal for a particular person or a small group of people (Guidance [D4]). They do not include highly specialised work activities which are not normal day-to-day activities for most people (Guidance [D8]). 200 Schedule 1 to the Equality Act 2010 sets out further provisions relating to the determination of disability. Paragraph 2(1) of Schedule 1 provides that the effect of an impairment will be “long term” if:
(a) it has lasted for at least 12 months;
(b) it is likely to last for at least 12 months; or
(c) it is likely to last for the rest of the life of the person affected. 201 The question of whether an impairment is “likely” (in the sense of “it could well happen”) to last for at least 12 months falls to be determined based only on evidence that was available, and on the circumstances prevailing at the relevant time. The Tribunal is not entitled to have regard to events occurring after the date of the alleged discrimination to determine whether the effect did (or did not) last for 12 months; see McDougall v Richmond Adult Community College [2008] ICR 431 at [23] – [24]. 202 Paragraph 2(2) of Schedule 1 provides that if an impairment ceases to have a substantial adverse effect on a person’s ability to carry out normal day to day activities, it is to be treated as continuing to have that effect if it is likely (again in the sense of “it could well happen”) to recur. The likelihood of recurrence is again to be judged based on evidence available and circumstances prevailing at the relevant time (McDougall at [26]). Protected disclosures 203 Section 43A of the ERA states: “In this Act a "protected disclosure" means a qualifying disclosure (as defined by section 43B) which is made by a worker in accordance with any of sections 43C to 43H.” 204 Section 43B of the ERA states:

(1) In this Part a “qualifying disclosure” means any disclosure of information which, in the reasonable belief of the worker making the disclosure, is made in the public interest and tends to show one or more of the following—

[…]

(b) that a person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation to which he is subject, […]
(d) that the health or safety of any individual has been, is being or is likely to be endangered, […]
(e) that information tending to show any matter falling within any one of the preceding paragraphs has been, is being or is likely to be deliberately concealed. 205 To succeed with any whistleblowing claim a claimant must first show they have made a qualifying disclosure as defined above. This comprises the following elements:

205.1 there must be a disclosure of information;
205.2 the individual genuinely believed the disclosure was in the public interest; and
205.3 in the reasonable belief of the individual that information showed one or more of the matters set out in section 43B. 206 The Court of Appeal provided further guidance in Kilraine v London Borough of Wandsworth [2018] ICR 1850. It said: “30 the concept of ‘information’ as used in section 43B(1) is capable of covering statements which might also be characterized as allegations. [….] Section 43B(1) should not be glossed to introduce into it a rigid dichotomy between “information” on the one hand and “allegations” on the other […]