RESERVED JUDGMENT

1. The Claimants were not unfairly dismissed by the respondent.

2. The claimants were not directly discriminated against on the basis of their races by the respondent.

DECISION

Claims and Issues

1. Page numbering referred to in square brackets in these reasons are to pages in the main hearing bundle, unless otherwise stated.

2. This is a claim which involves allegations of direct race discrimination, and unfair dismissal.

3. The respondent (hereinafter referred to as the club) is a company which has responsibility for running a members only yacht club. It is one of the oldest yacht clubs in the country dating back to its formation in 1843. The club is located in its own premises overlooking the River Orwell at Woolverstone,

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

Suffolk. Currently the club has approximately 650 members. There are catering and bar services on the premises.

4. Mr Marian Coltofean (300596/2024), the first claimant (hereinafter referred to as C1) is Romanian and worked for the club from 26 April 2021 until the termination of his employment on 8 November 2023. He was bar and catering manager, and the line manager of C2 and C3, amongst others.

5. Ms Monika Banasiak (3300597/2024) the second claimant (hereinafter referred to as C2) is Polish and worked for the club from 1 October 2011 until she was dismissed on 8 November 2023. She was a chef and also the cohabiting partner of C1 at the relevant time. It was her responsibility as chef to plan menus. Sometimes she did this in conjunction with the third claimant. This was done mainly during shifts.

6. Ms Elisabete Dos Santos Rocha (3300598/2024), the third claimant (hereinafter referred to as C3) is Portuguese and worked for the club from 18 March 2015 until 8 November 2023. She too was a chef. All three claimants were dismissed on 8 November 2023 ostensibly for gross misconduct involving the falsification of time sheets. The claimants were the only foreign nationals in the bar and catering team.

7. The club alleges that the dismissals were carried out for a fair reason, being misconduct, and in a fair manner, and that the decision to dismiss fell well within the band of reasonable responses for a reasonable employer. Further, that the club asserts that there is no evidential basis to conclude that the claimants’ nationalities played any role in the decision to dismiss, the sole reason being their misconduct.

8. For their part, the claimants allege that the dismissals were motivated by the fact that they were foreign nationals i.e. not British. It is averred that the allegations of falsification of time sheets were ‘manufactured’ by the club, and that there was, and had been for some time, a well established but unwritten process accepted by the management of the club that staff could claim for hours not worked at the club. Further, that such time could be claimed without specific reference to such a claim on the face of the time sheets, and that such a claim could be made in general terms i.e. without timings which accurately reflected the extra work done in a detailed way. It was alleged that there was ‘no proper time sheets system’ in place and no express rules for making claims for extra hours. Issues

9. The central issues for determination were set out by Mr Myers in his sub- missions. They appeared to us to be correct. They were not challenged at all by the claimant. We therefore adopt them for the purposes of our deci- sion. They are as follows:

a. Unfair Dismissal (Employment Rights Act (ERA) 1996):
i. What was the reason for each dismissal, and was it a poten- tially fair reason under the Employment Rights Act 1996? It is Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024 the respondent’s case that the reason was conduct, satisfying ERA 1996 s.98(2)(b);
ii. If a potentially fair reason is established, did the respondent act fairly in all the circumstances (ERA 1996 s.98(4)) in treat- ing that reason as sufficient to dismiss each claimant? This involves considering:

1. Whether the respondent followed a fair procedure and adhered to the principles of natural justice and the ACAS Code; and

2. Whether the decision to dismiss fell within the range of reasonable responses of a reasonable employer.

iii. Typically in such circumstances a Tribunal will assess:

1. Whether the respondent had, at the time of dis- missal, a genuine belief in each claimants miscon- duct, based on reasonable grounds after a rea- sonable investigation - British Home Stores Ltd v Burchell [1980] I.C.R. 303; and

2. Whether dismissal was a sanction open to a rea- sonable employer in light of that misconduct - Ice- land Frozen Foods Ltd v Jones 1983 ICR 17, EAT.

b. Direct discrimination (EqA 2010):
i. Have the claimants proven facts from which the Tribunal could conclude that their nationality was a factor in their treatment, i.e. that they were treated less favourably than real or hypothetical comparators because of race (national- ity), per Equality Act 2010 s.13. Procedure, Documents and Evidence Heard

10. The hearing took place from 15 to 22 September 2025 and was heard in person at the Employment Tribunal in Norwich (the panel made its decision on 8 December 2025-parties not present). The Tribunal first of all heard testimony from the claimants, as well as an additional witness in support of the claims, Ms Abbie Manser (bar and catering assistant). We then heard evidence from the respondent’s witnesses namely: Mrs Kathryn Deaton (club manager); Mr Simon Hewitt (former Commodore and chair of appeal hearing); Mr Mark Dean (vice Commodore and investigating officer); Mr Mike Clayton (treasurer and chair of disciplinary hearing); and Mr Laurie Vanner (commodore and investigating officer).

11. Each of the aforesaid witnesses adopted their witness statements and confirmed that their contents were true (sometimes with amendments to the original written version). We also had an agreed bundle of documents which comprises 461 pages; some additional documents relating to a meeting between Ms Deaton and Mr Hewitt on 22 November 2023 which I have

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

added to the main bundle as pages 462 to 465; and a supplementary bundle comprising 88 pages (submitted by the claimants). We also heard helpful submissions from Mr Coltofean and Mr Myers, who expanded upon their written closing submissions.

12. In coming to our decision, the Tribunal had regard to all of the written and oral evidence submitted, even if a particular aspect of it is not mentioned expressly within the decision itself.

Legal Framework

13. The relevant legislation in respect of the allegations of direct discrimination is contained in the Equality Act 2010 (“the Act”).

14. Race is a protected characteristics as defined by section 4 of the Act. Sections 39 and 40 prohibit unlawful discrimination against employees in the field of work. Section 39(2) provides that: “An employer (A) must not discriminate against an employee of A's

(B) -
(a) as to B's terms of employment;
(b) in the way A affords B access, or by not affording B access, to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training or for receiving any other benefit, facility or service;
(c) by dismissing B; or (d) by subjecting B to any other detriment.”

15. Section 136 of the Act provides that: “If there are facts from which the court could decide, in the absence of any other explanation, that a person (A) contravened the provision concerned, the court must hold that the contravention occurred”. This provision reverses the burden of proof if there is a prima facie case of direct discrimination.

16. In summary, the Act provides that a person with a protected characteristic is protected at work from prohibited conduct as defined by Chapter 2 of it. In addition to the statutory provisions, Employment Tribunals are obliged to take in to account the provisions of the statutory Code of Practice on the Equality Act 2010 produced by the Commission for Equality and Human Rights.

17. Direct discrimination is defined in section 13(1) of the Act as “A person (A) discriminates against another (B) if, because of a protected characteristic, A treats B less favourably than A treats or would treat others”. The application of those principles was summarised by the Employment Appeal

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

Tribunal in London Borough of Islington v Ladele (Liberty intervening)

EAT/0453/08, which has since been upheld:

(a) In every case the Employment Tribunal has to determine the reason why the claimant was treated as he was. In most cases this will call for some consideration of the mental processes (conscious or subconscious) of the alleged discriminator.
(b) If the Employment Tribunal is satisfied that the prohibited ground is one of the reasons for the treatment, that is sufficient to establish discrimination. It need not be the only or even the main reason. It is sufficient that it is significant in the sense of being more than trivial.
(c) Direct evidence of discrimination is rare and Employment Tribunals frequently have to infer discrimination from all the material facts. The courts have adopted the two-stage test. The first stage places a burden on the claimant to establish a prima facie case of discrimination. That requires the claimant to prove facts from which inferences could be drawn that the employer has treated them less favourably on the prohibited ground. If the claimant proves such facts then the second stage is engaged. At that stage the burden shifts to the employer who can only discharge the burden by proving on the balance of probabilities that the treatment was not on the prohibited ground. If they fail to establish that, the Tribunal must find that there is discrimination.
(d) The explanation for the less favourable treatment does not have to be a reasonable one. In the circumstances of a particular case unreasonable treatment may be evidence of discrimination such as to engage stage two and call for an explanation. If the employer fails to provide a non-discriminatory explanation for the unreasonable treatment, then the inference of discrimination must be drawn. The inference is then drawn not from the unreasonable treatment itself - or at least not simply from that fact - but from the failure to provide a non-discriminatory explanation for it. But if the employer shows that the reason for the less favourable treatment has nothing to do with the prohibited ground, the burden is discharged at the second stage, however unreasonable the treatment.
(e) It is not necessary in every case for an Employment Tribunal to go through the two-stage process. In some cases it may be appropriate simply to focus on the reason given by the employer (“the reason why”) and, if the Tribunal is satisfied that this discloses no discrimination, then it need not go through the exercise of considering whether the other evidence, absent the explanation, would have been capable of amounting to a prima Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024 facie case under stage one of the Igen test.
(f) It is implicit in the concept of discrimination that the claimant is treated differently than the statutory comparator is or would be treated. The determination of the comparator depends upon the reason for the difference in treatment. The question whether the claimant has received less favourable treatment is often inextricably linked with the question why the claimant was treated as she was. However, as the EAT noted (in Ladele) although comparators may be of evidential value in determining the reason why the claimant was treated as he or she was, frequently they cast no useful light on that question at all. In some instances, comparators can be misleading because there will be unlawful discrimination where the prohibited ground contributes to an act or decision even though it is not the sole or principal reason for it. If the Employment Tribunal is able to conclude that the respondent would not have treated the comparator more favourably, then it is unnecessary to determine the characteristics of the statutory comparator.

12. The relevant case law in relation to unfair dismissal is to be found in the Employment Rights Act (“ERA”) 1996 at section 98:

“General

(1) In determining for the purpose of this part whether the dismissal of an employee is fair or unfair it is for the employer to show–

(a) the reason (or if more than one, the principal reason) for the dismissal, and
(b) that it is either a reason falling within subsection

(2) or some other substantial reason of a kind such as to justify the dismissal of an employee holding the position which the employee held.

(2) A reason falls within this subsection if it-

(a) relates to the capability of qualifications of the employee for performing work of the kind which he was employed to do,
(b) relates to the conduct of the employee,
(c) is that the employee was redundant, or
(d) is that the employee could not continue to work in the position which he held without contravention (either on his part or on that of his employer) of a duty or restriction imposed by or under an enactment.” Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024 When the alleged reason for dismissal is misconduct, then the Tribunal should ask itself the following questions
(i) What was the reason (or, if more than one, the principal reason) for the Claimant’s dismissal? The Respondent asserts that the Claimant was dismissed for a reason related to his conduct (s.98(2)(b) ERA).
(ii) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the Claimant was dismissed for a reason relating to her conduct:

• Did the Respondent’s managers believe the Claimant to be guilty of gross misconduct?
• Did the Respondents’ managers have in mind reasonable grounds upon which to sustain that belief?
• At the stage at which that belief was formed on those grounds, had the Respondents’ managers carried out as much investigation into the matter as was reasonable in the circumstances?

(iii) 1.4 Did the Respondents in the circumstances (including its size and administrative resources) act reasonably or unreasonably in treating said conduct as a sufficient reason for dismissing the Claimant, to be determined in accordance with equity and the substantial merits of the case.
(iv) In the particular circumstances of this case, did the decision to dismiss fall within the band of reasonable responses which a reasonable employer might have adopted? Evidence

13. As there has been some delay in promulgating this decision, we have through it appropriate to set out the evidence we heard. What follows is a summary of the witness statements and the oral testimony we heard. In arriving at its decision, we took into account the whole of the evidence presented to us. We listened very carefully to all of the oral testimony given to us during the hearing by the various witnesses.

14. Mr Coltofean was the first to give evidence. In his statement, he explained that he began working for the Club in April 2019, initially without a formal contract, which was only provided later. It was his recollection that he only saw his contract as bar manager as part of the evidence presented by the club during the disciplinary process. His responsibilities included managing bar and catering operations, organising events, and overseeing staff. He regularly received positive feedback for his performance, including praise from the treasurer for excellent catering results.

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

15. C1 explained that time sheet practices were long-standing and based on trust. Staff completed time sheets monthly, often around the 20th of the month, using rota schedules and adding time for extra tasks such as shopping for supplies, menu planning, and attending meetings. These additional duties were authorised by management and had been claimed for before he joined. He stated that he sometimes asked staff to add time for these tasks and signed off their time sheets accordingly. There was no clocking-in system, and management never required reconciliation with alarm logs.

16. C1 described the disciplinary process as hostile. On 13 October 2023, C1 alleged that himself, C2 and C3 were all called to a meeting without explanation and accused of time sheet fraud. He felt humiliated and later raised a grievance citing intimidation, discrimination, and misuse of power. Despite this, he was suspended and dismissed for alleged gross misconduct in November 2023. He argued that the the process was rushed, biased, and ignored his grievance and established practices. He also claimed that other staff followed the same timesheet approach but were not investigated.

17. C1 believed the allegations were a pretext to removing him after he repeatedly raised concerns about bullying, harassment, and inconsistent treatment. He cited discriminatory treatment, noting that he and the other claimants were the only foreign nationals in the team and the only ones targeted. He concluded that the dismissal caused severe distress.

18. C1 provided answers to the club’s questions in cross-examination. He denied that he had received his written contract of employment in June 2021. He had been given the document at [123] for the first time at the disciplinary hearing. He agreed that falsifying time sheets would amount to gross misconduct. C1 explained that the filling out of time sheets was based on trust and that there was no way of verifying the times. He agreed that he was always treated as a valued employee, and that he had been encouraged to remain when he resigned in May 2023.

19. In relation to the emails at [147] he said it was evidence of a plan to get rid of him because he was standing up for himself. He suggested that they couldn’t get rid of the claimants in the height of summer due to the staffing implications. He denied that he had behaved inappropriately towards a Mr Bloomfield.

20. C1 was adamant that the scenario set out in Mrs Deaton’s witness statement at paragraphs 14 and 15 was not genuine. He said it was not important to him whether staff signed off on their times on the time sheets. He confirmed it was his signature on [345]. He said he had signed to make sure that it was accurate when compared to the rota. He accepted that the reference to “overtime” at the top of the sheet meant that C3 had begun to accrue overtime i.e. she had worked in excess of her annualised hours (see below).

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

21. C1 conceded that C3 had got to the end of her annualised hours on 27 August 2023 [344] but he was not aware of the rate of overtime paid after that. C2 had got to the end of her hours on 17 September 2023 [273]. C1 was reticent about admitting that he had been aware of the terms of their annualised hours contracts but eventually did so.

22. C1 stated that the claimants had mentioned taking out the bins in both meetings, as well as shopping, meetings, and menu planning. As for the grievance he raised, he said he did not recall any instances of him being blackmailed by the club. He also admitted that he was not subjected to any verbal or written racial slurs. He said the grievance had been an expression of the way he felt at the time [183]. He said the grievance had been written by the three of them together.

23. At the meeting on 7 November, he had explained that the time sheets were not falsified. He stated that he had not provided any further evidence after the meeting, despite being invited to do so by Mr Clayton. He said he had not used the word ‘complicit’ in the meeting, and repeated that the notes were not accurate. He objected to the way that Mrs Deaton had gone to a flag officer (Mr Dean) with concerns about C2 and C3 rather than coming to him as their line manager.

24. He explained that he had been told on 26 April 2021 by Mrs Deaton and Simon Hewitt that he was to take the time sheets on trust. There was nothing written down as to how to deal with time sheets. He had been told to round up to the nearest quarter of an hour. He had been told there was no need to flag up things like a trip to the shops as a discrete item on the time sheet.

25. C1 went on to tell us that C3 had filled out C2’s time sheet when she was too busy. C3 would ask if C2 had done any extra hours. C1 said that he had alleged a racial motive in the appeal hearing but it was not in the notes. He explained that he had filled out the time sheets of C3 at [SB24], as well as the time sheets for C2 at [SB30]. He later denied that he had completed the times for 22nd and 23rd on that time sheet.

26. C2 then provided her testimony. In her witness statement she described herself as a loyal and hardworking employee who consistently received positive feedback and praise for her contributions, including recognition during the COVID-19 pandemic for flexibility and support while on furlough. She had commenced employment with the club as assistant catering manager then as catering manager, but at the relevant time was a chef.

27. She emphasised that her duties often extended beyond contractual obligations. She regularly performed additional tasks such as shopping for supplies from local stores, collecting bakery goods, placing online food orders, menu planning at home, and attending staff meetings outside normal hours. These tasks were integral to the smooth running of the club and were, according to her, part of a long-standing practice authorised by management. C2 explained that time spent on these tasks was typically

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

added to time sheets as rough estimates, usually amounting to about an extra hour per week.

28. Time sheets were completed monthly, around the 20th of each month, and often based on rota schedules rather than exact start and finish times. She notes that management, including Kathryn Deaton, were aware of and accepted this process, and that she was never asked to reconcile time sheets with alarm logs.

29. On 13 October 2023, she and her colleagues were called to a meeting without explanation and accused of falsifying time sheets. She left the meeting in tears and later raised a grievance citing race discrimination, intimidation, and misuse of power. Despite this, she was suspended and dismissed for alleged gross misconduct in November 2023. She argued the process was rushed, biased, and ignored her grievance of 17 October 2023, and the established timesheet practices. No other staff were investigated, even though similar practices were common.

30. She alleged discriminatory treatment, stating that she and the other claimants were the only foreign nationals in the bar and catering team and the only ones targeted. She also highlighted inconsistencies, such as other employees being rewarded with paid break times while she was dismissed for minor discrepancies. She explained that the disciplinary process was fundamentally flawed and pre-judged. For example, Mrs Deaton, who was directly involved in timesheet approvals, was not interviewed or asked to provide a statement during the investigation.

31. C2 argued that no other team member of the bar and catering department was investigated or asked to provide a statement regarding the established practices despite the fact that all followed the same timesheet submission practices. She stated that all the other employees followed the same practice, as per Abbie Manser’s witness statement.

32. C2 also answered questions in cross-examination. She had been in the UK since 2004. She said she had not filled out her time sheet everyday. She too agreed there had been no racial slur as alleged in her grievance. She thought the outcome of the disciplinary hearing was predetermined. She confirmed she had said the things at items 1-4 on [194-195] but had said other things too. She had raised a previous incident of stealing hours re. Claire Lowe just before Covid. She had been told they were not there to talk about that. Claire had been British.

33. C2 accepted that C3 had filled out her time sheets. She had told C3 to add a little bit for deliveries etc. She would add 15-30 minutes. She would add rounded minutes. It would be in the same week. She never made specific mention of these tasks. It was how she had filled out her time sheet for 13 years. She denied that C1 had filled out her time sheets.

34. She lived in Shotley and C3 lived in Ipswich. They lived about 40 minutes apart. In reaction to her grievance at [260] she said she had brought up

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

discrimination and blackmail. She said she had been to work at 4.15 on 21 September 2023. That was the only day they had had a function after Mrs Deaton came back to work with a broken arm on 10 September 2023. She suggested that Mrs Deaton had not alarmed the club that day. She said the notes of the meeting on 7 November 2023 were not accurate.

35. C2 went onto explain that she had filled out her time sheet once a month. This meant that she had to rely on the rota when she did so. Times after 20th were as per rota because the time sheets were submitted to Mrs Deaton on that day. As far as she was concerned, there was never any attempt to reconcile the times afterwards.

36. Next was Ms. Dos Santos Rocha (C3) who gave similar evidence in her witness statement to that of C2. She said she was employed by the club for nearly nine years as a chef. She too described herself as a loyal and dedicated employee who consistently received positive feedback and never faced issues until the events leading to her dismissal. She highlights her honesty, citing an occasion when she reported a payroll error that overpaid her.

37. She asserted that she regularly performed additional tasks such as collecting bread and bakery goods from local suppliers, shopping for supplies, menu planning at home, attending staff meetings outside normal hours, and bin management. These tasks were authorised by management. Time spent on these tasks was added to time sheets as rough estimates, typically based on trust and the rota schedule. Time sheets were completed monthly, around the 20th of each month, and management—including Kathryn Deaton—was aware of and accepted this process.

38. When questioned, C3 also confirmed that she was never the subject of racial slurs, but she said she had been discriminated against. ‘Slur’ had been C1’s word. She said she had raised Claire Lowe in the meeting. She agreed the note of what she said at [342] was accurate. She suggested that C1 had not filled out her time sheets but that she had filled out C2’s time sheets. If she added 30 minutes for herself then she would also added 30 minutes for C2 as well. She did not check the minutes. She had been on a cruise from 16-30 September 2023. She confirmed that [380] was an accurate record.

39. The next person to give evidence was Mrs Abbie Manser, who did so on behalf of the claimants. In her witness statement she explained that she had been employed by the club as a bar and catering assistant. On 9 November 2023, Laurie Vanner instructed her and another catering assistant, Carla, to add two hours of paid break time to their time sheets. This was done, she suggested, as a gesture of appreciation for their hard work. Ms Manser had found this unusual given the issues relating to the claimants, which was ongoing.

40. She said she followed the same time sheet submission process as C2 and C3. When she was asked to perform additional tasks, such as collecting

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

supplies on her way to work, she would add an extra hour or half an hour to her timesheet to account for the time spent. She stated that this was a common practice and other team members she worked with did the same. She would send the time sheet to C1 and he would then approve it each month. She made reference to pages 31-32 of the supplementary bundle. Despite her starting and finishing at various times, including evenings, she explained that she was never questioned by the club’s management about the accuracy of her time sheets. She would collect mayonnaise or other essentials on her way to work and just add the time to the end of the shift, consistent with the rest of the team.

41. In cross-examination, Ms Manser said she had not been told to change the way she filled out time sheets and carried on doing it in the same way. Carla Green was doing it in the same way. Ms Manser had left to join the NHS in February 2024. She had been told not to add breaks to the time sheets. She had gone out to get ketchup and mayonnaise once every 2-3 weeks. Volunteers took over in the kitchen after October 2023.

42. Mrs Deaton gave evidence first of all for the respondent. In her witness statement she explained that she served as Club Manager at the Club from 2016 until April 2024. In her statement, she explained the employment arrangements for the claimants and addressed allegations about timesheet discrepancies. C2 and C3 worked under annualised hours contracts, meaning they received a fixed monthly salary regardless of hours worked, with additional pay only for hours beyond their annual targets. She explained that time sheets were used to track progress against these targets, not to calculate monthly pay. C1 as Bar and Catering Manager, was responsible for signing off these time sheets.

43. Mrs Deaton described how she discovered inconsistencies between the times recorded on time sheets and the club’s alarm logs, which showed when the building alarm was turned on or deactivated (i.e. when the building was open or not). These discrepancies suggested that the claimants had recorded start and finish times that were not accurate. In particular, Mrs Deaton stated she had broken her arm and so was walking to and from work. She lived in the same village as the Club, and her walk home was along Marina Road leading to and from the club. On the day in question the Club had a dinner booked that evening for a local club. She was surprised that the claimants had not arrived for work before she left for home. She said she had alarmed the building out of habit and expected to pass them as she walked home, along Marina Road, but did not.

44. As the dinner was reasonably early, starting about 7 pm, the next day Mrs Deaton had initially checked to see when the claimants had arrived at work and opened up the club. When reviewing the time sheets, the arrival times stated for the C2 and C3 were before Mrs Deaton had set the alarm and locked the club, and indeed before she had arrived home. It was this discrepancy that raised her concerns and she reported them to Mark Dean and Laurie Vanner.

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

45. She denied ever authorising extra time for tasks such as menu planning or shopping and stated that the claimants failed to provide any satisfactory explanation during the investigatory meeting. She also rejected claims that the meeting was hostile or that she permitted additional hours to be claimed.

46. Mrs Deaton noted that bread collection by one claimant was voluntary and minimal, and menu planning was part of normal duties, not extra work, and done during shifts. She contrasted the claimants’ situation with other staff, many of whom worked beyond their contracted hours without extra pay, and reiterated that zero-hours staff were paid accurately based on signed time sheets. It remained her view that the claimants deliberately falsified time sheets to increase their paid hours.

47. Mrs Deaton answered questions in cross examination. She stated that she had been reminded today that C3 was not at work on 21/9. On the following days she had only checked the time sheets of C2. She submitted payroll to Debbie on 22nd of each month. She had not agreed to claiming time for collecting items. She did accept that occasionally food orders were made at home, mainly in the winter months. She would expect that if there was a claim on the rare occasion it happened that it would be added to the time sheet on the day it happened. She did not recall this being done. It would be a day they were not rota’d and it should appear as an anomaly which could be checked. But it never happened. She said the claimants had never made them aware they were doing extra time outside of work that they wanted paying for.

48. When asked about it, she did recall a pre-agreed occasion when there had been a meal in Ipswich involving the claimants. She did not recall how it was dealt with on their time sheets. She accepted there were no rules to prevent claiming work off site. Both C2 and C3 did collect from shops but she had thought they were happy to do it and were not making claims.

49. She recalled the incident in relation to Claire Lowe. She had not said that they couldn’t afford to lose her. She recalled her hours were fine. She doesn’t investigate staff until there is evidence they cannot be trusted. She said that the question of whether the claimants were entitled to be paid for trips to the shops never came up. Mrs Deaton said it may have been naive on her part. There needed to be a discussion. She had been surprised by the claimants’ reaction at the meeting and that C2 and C3 left as they did. She denied that either she or Mr Dean had shouted.

50. For the sake of convenience, we note the comments attributed to Mrs Deaton in the document at [299], which is the note of the disciplinary hearing of C2. When asked how she allowed for hours for food collections and menu planning, she stated that mostly it would be done in work time. An exception might be the ordering of food in the winter. However, she stated that this could not account for the sort of discrepancies highlighted. She went on to explain that if extra time was claimed, that it would be put down on the time sheet on the day the work was done. We also note the comments attributed to Mrs Deaton by Mr Hewitt, who discussed the same matters as part of his

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

enquires [462-465]. Her answers are in a very similar vein to those already mentioned.

51. Mr Hewitt gave evidence next. He was the officer who chaired the appeal hearings. He is a former commodore of the club and one of its trustees. He described himself as having 25 years as a director at a major environmental consultancy and extensive experience managing disciplinary matters both in corporate and club settings. Mr Hewitt was asked to chair the appeal hearings because he had no prior involvement in the original disciplinary decisions. All three claimants lodged appeals which appear at [218], [303] and [372]. Each was interviewed by Mr Hewitt on 21 November 2023. The notes of the hearings are at [226], [311] and [380].

52. Mr Hewitt described that he had had an excellent working relationship with C1 whilst he had been Commodore. He highlighted the emails at [131-134] in which C1 praised the manner in which he was treated by the flag officers of the club. After Mr Hewitt completed his review of the evidence and the claimants’ representations he concluded that the decisions made by Mr Clayton (the dismissed officer), were entirely justified given the facts of the case. He was satisfied that the claimants were guilty of falsifying time sheets and were justifiably dismissed for gross misconduct. Accordingly, he dismissed each of the claimants' appeals concluding that the dismissal for gross misconduct were procedurally and substantially fair.

53. Mr Hewitt went on state that he was satisfied that the disciplinary investigation carried out by Mark Dean was thorough and reasonable, and that his conclusions were supported by relevant documentary evidence. He explained that he had no doubt about the quality of the evidence relied upon by the club and that C2 and C3 had deliberately submitted time sheets that claimed more hours than actually worked. He said he had not accepted their explanations for doing so. In relation to C1, he was satisfied that he had authorised the hours claimed knowing the other two claimants had not actually worked all the hours on the time sheets. Mr Hewitt also highlighted that the Club had previously gone to considerable lengths to retain C1, even offering financial assistance to prevent his resignation—a gesture that underscored the club’s good faith.

54. In December 2023, Mr Hewitt had issued outcome letters to each claimant, explaining his reasoning and addressing their arguments point by point. [231]; [320] and [390]. Mr Hewitt rejected claims that the process was improper or based on fabricated evidence, stressing that any employee guilty of similar misconduct would have faced the same outcome. As commodore, he suggested that he had always stressed that the club expected appropriate standards of behaviour from employees and members alike, and on occasions was required to take action against members when they did not meet these standards. His long professional experience, which included significant line management responsibilities, had resulted in a keen awareness of the importance of dealing with staff disciplinary matters in a fair, thorough and even-handed manner. Mr Hewitt affirmed that the

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

decisions were based solely on proven dishonesty, not influenced by race, discrimination, or any other factor.

55. Mr Hewitt answered questions put to him by C1 on behalf of the claimants. He explained that his role had been to assess all of the information and to decide if the dismissals had been fair and reasonable, and also to consider whether there was any merit in the allegation of race discrimination. He stated that the substance of the issue were the time sheets and the comparison of them with the alarm log, and the suggestion that time claimed was in excess of the time spent at the club premises. The question for him was whether this extra time as authorised. The first time he had looked at the issue was in November when he had been asked to chair the appeal hearings. It was his understanding that the claimants admitted that the time sheets were not consistent with the alarm log. He had spoken to Mrs Deaton, and she had told him that she had not authorised claims for work done off the premises. He had notes of this meeting but they they were not in the hearing bundle. They were later added at the hearing [462-465] at the Tribunal’s request. He had concluded that the analysis of the raw data had been done in a fair and reasonable way.

56. Mr Hewitt explained that he had thought there had been a good relationships between the club and the claimants. He had been saddened when this situation developed. He had taken the view that there were no grounds to look at other staff, even if they had wanted to. It was his understanding that staff should fill out time sheets in an accurate way. He said he had taken any suggestion of discrimination very seriously. He had recruited C1 and was aware he was of Romanian background. He had a good grounding in the service sector and had no problems with other nationalities. It was his judgment that there had been gross misconduct and that dismissal was justified.

57. Mr Hewitt had concluded that C1 had been aware at the time that the hours claimed by C2 and C3 extended beyond the hours worked on the premises. In the case of C2, they were in a relationship, and came to work together in the car. In his view, it was inconceivable that C1 didn’t know the hours C2 was working. The claimants had all insisted that they had the express authority of Mrs Deaton to claim for extra duties, and they said they had further evidence of this. Mr Hewitt said he had asked for it, but it had not been forthcoming. It was his view that the extra hours claimed had been spread around so as to conceal them. He was not aware that the claimants had taken issue with the accuracy of the notes prior to the commencement of the litigation.

58. Mr Clayton was the dismissing manager and he gave evidence next. In his witness statement he set out that he had been the treasurer of the club since December 2020, and had a background as a qualified accountant, and experience in handling disciplinary matters. On 7 November 2023, he chaired three separate hearings involving the claimants. Although the meetings were timetabled separately, each of the claimants attended all three meetings. C1 tended to assume the role of representative on behalf

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

of C2 and C3. Mr Clayton suggested that each had access to the same documentation, and was given full opportunity to respond to the allegations. He explained that he had offered them the chance to question witnesses and clarify evidence, even accommodated their preference to have the witnesses, Mrs Deaton and Mr Dean, excluded from the hearings. This was achieved by Mr Clayton relaying questions and answers. The notes of the hearings appear at [215], [297],and [363].

59. The claimants did not submit any written statements or other documents at the disciplinary hearings. In particular they did not ask Mr Clayton to consider any alternative time sheet reconciliations or calculations. During his disciplinary hearing, C1 had said he wanted to send Mr Clayton a statement after the hearing. It was explained he could do this by no later than 6pm but he said he would not be “bullied” and would send it in his “own time”. Mr Clayton explained that this was a good example of how he found C1’s approach to the hearings to be combative. C1 did not send Mr Clayton any other statements or information. He understood that none were submitted as part of his appeal. Likewise, C3 had said she had a witness statement from her “Line Manager”, being C1, which she wanted to provide in a couple of days. Mr Clayton had asked her to email it to him after the hearing so that he could take it into account [367]. Again, no statement was sent in at any time after her hearing.

60. Mr Clayton went on to detail that C1 had argued that the alarm system was faulty and therefore the alarm logs could not be accurate or reliable. Secondly, their case was that C2 and C3 adjusted the times on their time sheets to take account of menu planning, meetings and ordering supplies from home. When asked, C1 agreed with Mr Clayton’s understanding of their cases, namely that the times on the sheets recorded the correct total hours but the times shown working were wrong. C1 said they were told to do it this way. Mr Clayton stated that C1 had admitted he had signed the time sheets as accurate and then passed them to Kathryn Deaton. At the end of the disciplinary hearing for C3, she agreed with Mr Clayton’s summary of her case that the times on her time sheets did not align with the times when the alarm was set because she had made adjustments for other activities such as collection of bread, amounting to 3 or 4 hours a month [page 367]. C3 agreed that there was no indication on the timesheet that this was the case.

61. Mr Clayton concluded that based on the documents and the evidence given and discussed at the three disciplinary hearings, C2 and C3 were guilty of falsifying their time sheets on many occasions and, as a consequence, had claimed for more hours worked than had actually been carried out by them. He was satisfied that the claimants had failed to provide any plausible or acceptable explanations for doing this. He did not accept they were adding in times for additional tasks as they had claimed. If this was the case, Mr Clayton judged this extra time would be separately recorded. As it was not, there was no way of identifying it. Nor did he accept they were doing as instructed by Mrs Deaton or any other person.

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

62. In relation to C1, Mr Clayton found that he had knowingly and dishonestly approved the falsified time sheets. Indeed, during the disciplinary hearing, he admitted that he had authorised the disputed time sheets and he knew that additional unworked hours were being added to the sheets. C1 had argued there was a problem with the accuracy of the alarm system but Mr Clayton was entirely satisfied that this was not the case. In any event, he found that C1 was not permitted or authorised, as part of his duties as manager, to permit any employee to claim extra time not worked by submitting falsified time sheets.

63. Mr Clayton dismissed a secondary allegation of food hygiene breaches as unproven. However, he determined that the proven timesheet misconduct amounted to gross dishonesty, resulting in a total loss of trust and confidence. He decided dismissal without notice was appropriate, even considering the claimants’ length of service, as falsifying time sheets was expressly listed as gross misconduct in the staff handbook. Mr Clayton noted that the claimants failed to attend the scheduled meeting for the outcome, so he had communicated his decision by email and followed up with detailed dismissal letters on 10 November 2023, which included the right of appeal. These letters appear at [215], [294], and [370].

64. Mr Clayton rejected any suggestion that his decisions were influenced by race or discrimination, stating that his conclusions were based solely on the facts and the claimants’ failure to provide acceptable explanations. He confirmed that any employee guilty of similar conduct would have faced the same sanction.

65. When questioned on behalf of the claimants at the hearing before us, Mr Clayton stated he had considered the case against each of the three claimants and concluded there was a breach of trust in addition to the gross misconduct which meant that dismissal was the only option. It was his understanding that the claimants could be paid for the extras but the evidence from Mrs Deaton was that it needed to be evidenced on the time sheets. If there was a start time which varied from the time they arrived at the club then there should be a note on the time sheet about that, and the reason for it. This was what he would have expected as treasurer. He accepted that this was not enshrined in writing any where, but he had never seen seen those sorts of instructions in any other workplace, having managed people for many years. It was obvious and common sense in his opinion.

66. Mr Clayton also explained that he didn’t accept the scale of the activities claimed by the claimants. There was limited evidence adduced by the claimants as to when they had added the extra time and why it had been added. He had been aware of the grievances. He had been aware of the claimants’ length of service. He accepted that he may have misremembered the time he had asked people to come back for the disciplinary outcome. He had telephoned all three to try to speak to them when they had not attended, but they did not answer. Mr Clayton explained that if you finish at a time, rounding up, he would expect it to be accurate on every single day. They

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

could put extra hours in the employee signed column but he accepted Mrs Deaton’s evidence that she wasn’t expecting them to be working significant amounts of time doing these extra duties.

67. Mr Clayton was asked about breaks by the panel. He explained that the practice with C2 and C3 was to pay them start to finish and pay them for a breaks if they had not had time to take them. It varied depending on how busy they were. It was his view that by submitting their time sheets that they were representing that they were accurate, whether they signed them or not. It was Mr Clayton’s view that if the manager authorised the time sheets then the club was happy to adopt them in the absence of evidence to the contrary.

68. Mr Dean, the investigation officer, was next to give evidence. In his witness statement he explained that he was the current commodore of the club. The claimants worked in the club’s catering and bar service—an important but financially challenging part of its operations. C1 managed the bar and catering team, which included the other two claimants, both chefs, employed on annualised hours contracts. These contracts required accurate time sheets to ensure fair pay and compliance with agreed working hours.

69. As part of the response to C1’s email dated 6 September 2023 to Laurie Vanner [167], it was agreed that Mr Dean meet C1, with Mr Vanner, on Friday 29 September 2023. Mr Dean’s recollection was that C1 was still concerned about the incident with Guy Welsh. However, Mr Dean also remembered that C1 admitted he had pinched the nipples of the part-time caretaker, Mr Bloomfield, yet had made a complaint about Guy Welsh for doing exactly the same to him. C1 described his actions as a “joke”. He said he was in the “wrong” and agreed that Guy had done the same to him. Given his behaviour towards Mr Bloomfield and the fact that Mr Welsh had apologised and stopped ‘fooling around’, Mr Dean had said that he considered the matter closed. It was agreed with C1 that no further action was required in connection with his complaint.

70. During the week commencing 25 September 2023, he recalled that Mrs Deaton, reported to him her concerns about the accuracy of C2’s and C3’s time sheets whom she judged had recorded more hours than actually worked based on her observations of their arrival times.

71. Mr Dean investigated, comparing time sheets with security alarm logs, which showed repeated overstatements of hours worked. When confronted in an investigatory meeting on 7 November 2023, C2 and C3 agreed that they had filled in the time sheets. C1 conceded that he had signed them as approved. In Mr Dean’s view, the claimants were, however, unable to give any satisfactory explanation for the time sheet discrepancies. They did not argue they had permission to do what they did or say that Kathryn Deaton had given her authority for this.

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

72. It was Mr Dean’s recollection that all three claimants became very defensive, with C1 dominating the meeting. A number of explanations were given as to why they had added additional time to the time sheets, and these were noted. C2 and C3 offered to pay back any incorrect wages. Both became upset and asked if they could leave the meeting, which was agreed. C1 remained for approximately 10 more minutes before the meeting finished. Mr Dean explained that at no time during the above investigatory meeting did he accuse the claimants of committing fraud or stealing money

73. Mr Dean stated that he had spoken with Mrs Deaton about the claimants’ argument that extra time had been included in their hours for collecting supplies etc.. He explained that she had been adamant that neither she nor anyone else had given permission for extra time spent on driving to and from the local shops or for collecting supplies to be added to the weekly time sheets. He noted that even if there was an agreement or some form of custom and practice, no such extra time was actually shown on the time sheets. Mr Dean judged it inexplicable that C2 and C3 had recorded exactly the same excessive hours for over 40% of the time on the occasions when there was a discrepancy.

74. All three employees were suspended. Around this time, each claimant raised grievances, with C1 alleging racial discrimination and bullying. Mr Dean strongly denied these accusations, describing them as unfounded and a reaction to the investigation.

75. On 18 October 2023 Mr Dean sent a letter to the claimants informing them that they would be invited to a disciplinary hearing and also acknowledging receipt of their grievances [186]. He noted that a large part of what the claimants had included in the grievance related to matters that had previously been raised and fully addressed with them and which were therefore considered historical in nature. However, Mr Dean explained in the letters that any complaints which were relevant to the gross misconduct allegations should be included in any representations the claimants made at the disciplinary hearings.

76. The disciplinary hearings took place on 7 November 2023. Despite being given opportunities to respond, it was Mr Dean’s view that the claimants did not provide evidence that altered the findings. Dean maintained that falsifying time sheets amounted to dishonesty and gross misconduct, justifying dismissal. He rejected suggestions that the allegations were fabricated or discriminatory, affirming that the process followed the club’s disciplinary policy.

77. In cross-examination, Mr Dean explained that Mrs Deaton had raised concerns with him in the week commencing 25 September 2023. She had shown him the time sheets of C2 and C3 for September. She had highlighted the discrepancy of arrival time for C2 on 21 September. She also had expressed concerns about the patterns of C2 and C3’s times, and that she had not expected them to be identical on so many occasions. Mr Dean had agreed that it justified further investigation. It had been a day or two

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

before they had realised that they could use the alarm log as a means of comparison. He accepted that C3 was on holiday on 21 September but he had not been aware of this. His focus had been on September as a whole. He set out that the times for 21 September did not appear as one of the discrepancies relied upon by the club as the times claimed on that day were not inconsistent with the alarm log. He had spent days looking at the data and had found it onerous.

78. He said that Mrs Deaton had confirmed that she had been unaware that staff were claiming time for collections of food etc. After 13 October meeting when the claimants had provided a number of explanation for the discrepancies, he had taken a number of additional steps. He had contacted the alarm company to ensure the alarm log was accurate. He had also carried out a further analysis of the time sheets. He found to his surprise that there were 19 occasions when C2 and C3 had overstated their times by the same amount. He felt that was sufficient for the purposes of his investigation. He was able to conclude that the matter needed to progress to a disciplinary hearing. The decision to proceed was taken by the flag officers collectively, excluding Stephanie Hemsley, who had previously expressed the view that the club should not have allowed the claimants to withdraw their resignations in June 2023 [149]. Mr Dean said there were no minutes of this meeting. They would haven taken advice from an employment lawyer. Mr Dean explained that the bar and catering function had been outsourced in January 2024, after a period when the club had tried to fill the gap left by the claimant’s departure with volunteers.

79. Finally, we heard from Mr Vanner. In his two witness statements he explained that he served as commodore of the club from December 2022 to December 2024. On 20 May 2023, C1 telephoned him, upset and angry, claiming he had been bullied by two club members. The following day, he resigned by email, giving four weeks’ notice and expressing gratitude for his time at the club. Soon after, the other two claimants also resigned, apparently in solidarity. Mr Vanner suspected the resignations were linked to the bullying incident, though some Flag Officers speculated the trio intended to start their own catering business [147-151]. Nevertheless, Mr Vanner believed the complaint was genuine and arranged for an investigation. The inquiry confirmed that C1 had been bullied, and disciplinary action was taken against the members involved, who received final written warnings. The claimants withdrew their resignations and returned to work after the matter was resolved.

80. In July, a new issue arose. A visitor complained that C1 had bent her spoon, which had sentimental value. Mr Vanner conducted a disciplinary hearing and issued him a first written warning, emphasising the importance of professional conduct. Mr Vanner recalled that C1 was quite emotional during the meeting explaining that his domestic arrangements with his wife were difficult. Mr Vanner offered for the Club to fund professional counselling for C1.

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

81. Around the same time, C1 complained about inappropriate behaviour by a colleague, Guy Welsh. Welsh admitted to joking behaviour, apologised, and was given a verbal warning. Later, C1 admitted to similar conduct toward another staff member, a Mr Boomfield, which it was felt undermined his complaint.

82. Mr Vanner stated that on 6 September 2023 he received an email raising further questions about the various matters set out above, and in particular sought to re-open his complaint about Guy Welsh [page 167]. On 29 September 2023, Mr Dean and Mr Vanner interviewed C1 about the concerns he had raised on 6 September. He asked if Mr Welsh’s actions had been repeated after he had been spoken to on in July. C1 stated “no” but that on one occasion Mr Welsh had “winked” at him. He asked if this had happened with any other members of staff and he stated “no”. Mr Vanner then asked if C1 had done anything similar to David Bloomfield,, the caretaker of the club. After an initial hesitation he said "yes", “once” and then corrected himself and said “probably twice”. He stated that it had been “a joke” between him and Mr Bloomfield.

83. Mr Vanner explained that the reason why he had had asked C1 about Mr Bloomfield is that whilst he had not raised a complaint about the C1 at the time he had recently volunteered to Mrs Deaton that C1 had pinched his nipples which he had found objectionable. C1 admitted he was in the wrong and that his actions were the same as those of Mr Welsh It was agreed that no further action need be taken about Mr Welsh.

84. On the following morning, Mr Vanner recalled that he had been approached by C1. He explained that he thought he’d annoyed Mr Vanner the previous day. Mr Vanner explained that he was merely frustrated because he had equivocated initially in relation to his actions with David Bloomfield. C1 had apparently gone on to say how much he respected Mr Vanner and how much he enjoyed working at the Club.

85. On 17 October 2023 the claimants submitted their grievance. Mr Vanner had been irritated and disappointed at the wide ranging and unjustified nature of his allegations, many of which were clearly directed at him. Mr Vanner explained that he could not see how he had been the victim of any form of race discrimination, intimidation, humiliation, management abuse, misuse of power or blackmail. Nor could he see how he was the victim of “unequal treatment” or “racial slurs, micro-aggressions, false accusation and bullying” or an “exclusion from freedom of speech and opinion expression”. It was Mr Vanner’s view that this was the claimants’ misplaced attempt to avoid answering the time sheet discrepancies that they had been unable to answer on 13 October, and an attempt to deflect attention.

86. In a supplementary witness statement, he admitted that he he had told Abbie Manser and Carla Green to add two hours of paid break time to their time sheets in recognition of their hard work. He had done so because he was anxious to retain staff at a difficult time. Mr Vanner told the office that he had made the gesture and to expect it on their time sheets. It had been

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

an ad hoc gesture and not pursuant to any policy or established practice in terms of paid breaks.

87. When cross-examined, Mr Vanner explained that he had provided a witness statement to Mr Dean on the kitchen hygiene allegations, but he had not investigated the matter beyond that. He did not recall a collective change of attitude on the part of management of the club after the claimants had withdrawn their resignations in May/June 2023, albeit that two flag officers had expressed doubts as to whether they should have been allowed to withdraw their resignations. Mr Vanner asserted that he had had the best of relationships with the claimants in his view. He stated that if the claimants had asked to be paid for extras, then it was likely it would have been approved. However, it would have needed to be explained what these extra tasks were, and there would need to be approval. Mrs Deaton had told him that she had not authorised the claims in question.

Findings

88. Based on the evidence that we heard and read, the we made the following primary findings of fact relevant to the issues that we had to determine.

89. The club is a company which has responsibility for running a members only yacht club. Currently, it has approximately 650 members. There are catering and bar services on the premises.

90. The club is managed by elected members who sit on the general committee. The elected flag officers, comprising of the commodore, two vice commodores, three rear commodores and a treasurer, together form the executive management of the club which is always subject to the general committee’s involvement and approval of its individual and collective areas of responsibility and decision making.

91. At the relevant time, the respondent had about four permanent members of staff, as well as other casual staff on zero hours contracts. There were around 10 staff at the relevant time. The club was also run by a number of volunteers.

92. In broad terms, the claimants had good relationships with the club and its officers. This included Mrs Deaton. This was acknowledged by C1 in his testimony to the Tribunal. Their wages had been increased in April 2022 as a recognition of their value to the club [132]. The claimants were actively encouraged to remain by management when they handed in their notices of resignation in May 2023.

93. C2 and C3 worked on the basis of annualised hours. This was because of the seasonal nature of the club’s activities i.e. sailing, which was more popular in the summer months than in winter. As a consequence, C2 and C3 were both paid one twelfth of their annual salary, irrespective of their hours worked. The time sheets that they filled out each month were not used to pay their monthly salaries but in order that the club could monitor whether

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

they were on track with their annualised hours, or whether they were ahead or behind. It was Mrs Deaton’s role to keep a running total for this purpose. She was not required to authorise the entries in C2 or C3’s time sheets. This was C1’s responsibility as their line manager. If C2 or C3 reached their annualised hours, they would be paid their basic monthly salary plus an hourly rate for all hours worked over the annualised hours.

94. We find that it was therefore a matter of some importance to both the claimants and the club that the time sheets were filled out in a manner which accurately reflected the number of hours that C2 and C3 spent working for the club. In the Tribunal’s view, this is a matter of plain common sense. We also find that it was flagged up as a matter of importance by the club’s disciplinary process which specified that falsification of time sheets as potentially an act of gross misconduct. The claimant’s all accepted that they had knowledge of this fact.

95. In our judgment, there was considerable advantage in C2 and/or C3 to reach their annualised hours as soon as possible. We find that the claimants were mindful of this at the relevant time. We also find that C1 was aware of the nature of C2 and C3’s contracts in this regard. At the hearing, C1 was reticent to accept that he had been aware of the fact that they had annualised hours contracts. We did not accept that he had been in any doubt of this at all. It was clear to us that he must have been fully aware. We say this for a number of reasons. Firstly some of the time sheets we have seen in this case make reference to how C2 and C3’s hours compared to their contracted annualised hours cap ([273], [274], [290], [344], [345], and pages 24, 28, 29 of the supplementary bundle). Secondly, C1 was responsible for authorising these time sheets. Thirdly, he was their line manager. Further, he lived with C2, and filled out both C2’s and C3’s time sheets on occasions (at least on his own evidence).

96. One of C1’s duties was to ensure that time worked was accurately recorded by staff under his supervision, and to verify the time sheets they submitted. He was then required to pass them to his line manager, Mrs Deaton, the Club Manager. We are satisfied that it was not Mrs Deaton’s job to verify the times recorded by C2 and C3. She was clearly not in a position to do so. In relation to time sheets, Mrs Deaton’s primary role was to check the total hours they had worked with the annualised hours in their contracts of employment, and to ensure that they were paid appropriately if they exceeded those hours. We note that it was C2’s testimony that she had signed off on the team’s time sheets prior to the employment of C1 (she had previously been employed as catering manager).

97. It was C1’s evidence that he was only required to check time sheets against the rota [paragraph 4 of his witness statement]. We do not agree. Whilst there are limits to what can be verified by a manager in C1’s position, and that some of the information must be taken on trust, we are satisfied that the responsibility goes beyond simply cross referring with the rota. We take the view that the responsibility is to actively monitor where possible. Of course, we accept that he did not have access to the alarm logs, and that

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

there was no ‘clocking in’ system. Many work places are in the same position. However, we note that C1 and C2 cohabited, so it is not true to say that C1 did not have some means of verifying the accuracy of the time sheets submitted by at least C2. We also note that they often worked the same shifts, so there was ample opportunity for C1 to monitor the recording of time if he had been inclined to do so.

98. It was the claimants’ cases that staff were authorised to carry out, and to be paid for, work which took place off the club’s premises, such as collecting supplies from local shops (including bakers and butchers) and delivering them to the kitchen. It was suggested that these tasks would often be performed between shifts or on the way to/from work. The claimants also mentioned planning events and online orders; ad hoc managerial or departmental meetings; and emptying the bins after closing. These matters are set out in some detail in documents within the supplementary bundle at pages 44-46 which suggest that C2 spent over 8 hours a month engaged in these additional duties, and C3 over 6 hours. We do not accept this evidence. We also note that none of the information in the supplementary bundle, or the evidence of Miss Manser (see below), was before the club during the disciplinary proceedings. It is fair to say that the claimants’ cases have evolved considerably since they brought their claims in the Employment Tribunal. This level; of inconsistency in the way they have put their cases has tended to undermine their credibility, and the cogency of their claims.

99. There are text messages at page 46 of the supplemental bundle which seem to evidence a specific occasion when Mrs Deaton requested that C3 come into work, but this appears to be a request to start her shift early, not to do extra work as defined by the claimants. It does not support the claimants’ case.

100. At pages 48 to 88 of the supplementary bundle, there is some evidence of occasions where the claimants engaged in tasks outside of normal shifts at the club’s premises. But in our view, these appear to be limited in number, and lacking the appearance of formality. Further, what is not provided is any documentary evidence that the club was aware of these tasks being performed and/or that it had agreed to pay for these tasks to be carried out outside of normal shifts. There are letters from some of the local providers. However, none have provided witness statements or given evidence at the hearing. We have been able to give these letters limited, if any, weight as the information they provide, as it could not be challenged by Mr Myers in cross-examination on behalf of the club.

101. Of course, we have had regard to the evidence of Ms Manser on this point. We are satisfied that she was trying to be helpful to the Tribunal. However, we found her testimony to be anecdotal. She gave limited occasions when she had carried out errands outside of a normal shift, for which she says she was paid. However, we saw no evidence of any claims for such time, or as to how they were dealt with on her time sheets.

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

102. We also accept that in about October 2023, Ms Manser and another member of staff (Miss Green) were told to add two hours of extra time onto their time sheets as a reward for their hard work. Mr Vanner confirmed this. However, this was clearly an example of a club officer giving a one off, express permission, to claim extra hours not actually worked. In our view, it provided little assistant in addressing the issues in this case. We were not even told how the Ms Manser and her colleague had entered these hours onto their time sheets. We note that Mr Vanner had felt the need to notify the office to what he had done, and to warn them that they may see extras claims on the employees’ time sheets. This evidence, which we accept, does not support some general ad hoc approach to claiming extra hours on the part of the club.

103. On 21 May 2023, the claimants all gave notice of their intention to resign from their employment with the club on the grounds that they had been subjected to bullying and and harassment from club members. After receiving assurances from the club, the claimants withdraw their resignations in the beginning of June 2023. There was an investigation into the claimants’ complaints, and three members of the club were subject to final written warnings [165]. It was our view that this matter was resolved to the claimants’ satisfaction at the time, demonstrated by all three withdrawing their resignations.

104. On 20th July 2023, C1 lodged a complaint about a club member, Guy Walsh, who it was said had repeatedly touched C1 inappropriately on the bottom and chest, and made unwelcome comments [158]. This was dealt with informally by the club [165].

105. In August 2023, the claimant received a first written warning in relation to an incident with a customer at the club. It was admitted by the claimant that he had bent one of the customers spoons, which it was said had sentimental value. He stated that he had done it as a joke.The claimant unsuccessfully appealed the sanction [161].

106. On 6 September 2023, C1 raised a further complaint about the way the ‘spoon’ and the ‘Guy Walsh’ incidents had been dealt with by the club and how inconsistent the processes had been [167]. There was a meeting about this complaint on 29 September 2023 [169]. Again, we are satisfied that this meeting with C1 was left with his agreement that all matters had been satisfactorily resolved. We find that on the following day, 30 September 2023, that C1 had contacted Mr Vanner to apologise that he annoyed Mr Vanner the previous day. C1 had gone on to say how much he respected Mr Vanner and how much he enjoyed working at the Club.

107. In general terms, and prior to 13 October 2023, the claimants had a good working relationship with the club and its various officers and managers. The claimants are told us this in evidence, and it is apparent from the documentary evidence in the bundle. There was the notable exception of May/June 2023, when the claimants had all resigned, but it was our view

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

that this was an isolated incident which had been satisfactorily revolved by the way the club had pursued their complaint, albeit perhaps little tardily.

108. Matters relating to the C2 and C3’s time sheets first came to light, at least on the club’s evidence, on 21 September 2023. Mrs Deaton gave evidence on this issue which has caused the Tribunal considerable concern. In our view, the occasion for the investigation into the claimants’ time sheets, and the date of the commencement of that investigation, are a matter of significance, even on the club’s case. If there is an genuine and organic origin for the enquiry into the time sheets, then this goes some way to strengthening the club’s case, both in terms of unfair dismissal and discrimination.

109. In broad terms, what is alleged by the club is that Mrs Deaton left work on a particular date, and in doing so became concerned that C2 and C3 had not yet attended the club. There was an important event at the club that evening and Mrs Deaton’s evidence was that she would have expected bar and and catering staff to be there by then. It was agreed between the parties that in leaving the club, Mrs Deaton would have been bound to have passed the claimants on arrival. Subsequently, Mrs Deaton explained that she had checked C2 and C3’s time sheets to find that they appeared to have entered arrival times prior to Mrs Deaton’s departure on that day. This caused an investigation to be made of the alarm logs which resulted in several other anomalies coming to light on the time sheets.

110. What is curious about this case is that until the hearing before us, there had been no attempt by the parties to ascertain the date upon which Mrs Deaton’s suspicions first arose. Mr Dean first obtained the alarm logs on or about 2 October 2023 [171], so it must have been before that. There is no contemporaneous record of the meeting held between the claimants, Mr Dean and Mrs Deaton on 13 October (but see [194]), but no-one suggested that the date of the first suspicious incident was mentioned. Neither is it addressed in the suspension letter dated 18 October 2023 [186]. It is conspicuously not addressed in Mr Dean’s witness statement for the purposes of the disciplinary hearing [194].

111. So we arrived at the hearing with this issue left unresolved. None of the witness statements tackled the date. There was a discussion and some evidence given by the claimants in the first few days dealing with this question. C1 suggested it was 22 September 2023. Mr Myers made it clear that this was not accepted by the club. Subsequently, C1 also seemed to suggest that the relevant date was 23 September 2023. It was all rather confusing and surprising because there had been no attempt to identify the relevant time sheets which had prompted the club to obtain the alarm logs.

112. Matters came to a head when Mrs Deaton gave evidence on day three of the hearing, having been present in the public gallery and having listened to previous discussions. As stated above, her witness statement as disclosed did not give a date for the said occasion. It explained that she had alarmed the building upon leaving work, and had been surprised that the claimants

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

were not already at work themselves. It was an occasion when she was nursing a broken arm. On the following days she had checked to see when the claimants arrived for work. She stated “I checked the folder and when reviewing the time sheets the arrival times started for the second and third claimants were before [her emphasis] I had set the alarm and locked the club, and indeed before I arrived at home. It was this discrepancy that raised my concerns and i reported them to mark Dean and Laurie Vanner” [paragraph 15].

113. Mrs Deaton was sworn in, and asked to adopt her witness statement. She explained that she wished to make some amendments. At paragraph 14, she wished to remove reference to her alarming the building. She confirmed that she had not done so. She stated that the same paragraph should also refer to the date as 21 September 2023. At paragraph 15, she wished to correct it to refer to only the second claimant, and also the reference to her setting the alarm. We allowed the changes.

114. By way of further explanation, she stated that she had left work at about 4.15pm, and had got home at about 4.35pm. She lived very nearby. She said she had changed her mind about her evidence having listened to the information in the Chubb report, presumably a reference to the document at [172]. This was not further explained. She also stated that she had been reminded today that the third claimant was not at work on 21 September 2023. Mrs Deaton explained that she had only checked the time sheets for C2 on the following day. She had gone on to look at the time sheets for both C2 and C3 for other occasions and found that they mirrored each other in terms of start/finish times.

115. The Tribunal was provided with the document at [460-461], which Mrs Deaton explained were text messages she had used a few days earlier to jog her memory as to the arrangements for 21 September 2023, which was a Thursday. There had been a dinner for the Woodbridge Cruising Club at the club on that evening. The parti were eventually agreed that the relevant date was 21 September 2023.

116. The club asserts that this issue is not important because matters moved on once the alarm logs were obtained. Indeed, it argues that 21 September is not even one of the days relied upon when disciplining the claimants because it was eliminated as it fell within the 15 minute margin for error in terms of any anomalies. We do not agree that it is unimportant. We think it is potentially relevant to the procedural fairness of the dismissals, and to the question of credibility of the club’s witnesses. We will return to this issue below.

117. As a result of matters on 21 September 2023, Mr Dean obtained copies of the alarm logs from the service provider, Chubb Security. These logs demonstrated that on several occasions, C2 and C3’s time sheets were anomalous with times that the alarm was either turned off at the start of the shift, or when it was turned on at the end of the shift. A list of these anomalies was prepared and presented to the claimants as part of the

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

disciplinary hearing [196-197] (“the schedules”). The club also considered it surprising that the time sheets for C2 and C3 were often identical notwithstanding that they did not live together. These were also itemised in the schedules.

118. It is worth dwelling on this evidence for a moment, as it is clearly important in the context of this case as a whole. Over the period investigated, which was a three month period prior to between July and October 2023, C2 had entered start times on her time sheet earlier than the time when the alarm was turned off on 7 occasions. The discrepancies varied between 55 and 26 minutes. As stated, the club had not relied upon any occasions when the anomaly was not more than 15 minutes. This was because the club instructed staff to round up their times to the nearest quarter of an hour.

119. C2’s time sheet had similar discrepancies at the end of shifts. She had recorded a time after the alarm was activated on 21 occasions. These discrepancies varied between 58 and 19 minutes. Over the period analysed, there was a total discrepancy for C2 of 896 minutes, which is nearly 15 hours.

120. The same examination of C3’s time sheets took place. At the start of her shifts there were 3 anomalies of between 49 and 23 minutes; and at the end of the shift, 21 discrepancies of between 53 and 19 minutes. The total discrepancy for C3 was 716, nearly 12 hours. It was the Tribunal’s view that these were significant discrepancies over a relatively short period of time. There were identical discrepancies for C2 and C3 on 19 occasions in total, which appears to the Tribunal to be more than a mere coincidence. The club was justified and reasonable in coming to the same conclusions.

121. Also, we find that it was not simply that the claimants were entering times taken from the rota. The times C2 and C3 input onto their time sheets were different from the rota on several occasions. It is also difficult to see how their hours could have correlated with each other quite so regularly by reason of extra duties, if the duties undertaken by each were not the same.

122. On 23 September 2023, C2 was rota’d to work from 10am to 10pm [SB20]. She claimed 12 hours on her timesheet, when the alarm log time suggested that the catering and bar area was open only for 10 hours and 38 minutes. She claimed that she started work on 10am when the alarm was to de- activated until 10.55am. She further claimed to have worked until 10pm when the alarm was set on 21.33 [172]. C2’s time sheet for this day is at [290]. There is no apparent explanation for the discrepancy. We also note that C1 worked that day, according to the rota from 10am to 10pm. C1 initially accepted that he had filled out the time sheet for this day but then changed his mind about it. He did admit that he had at least signed the time sheet as a whole as accurate.

123. We find that time sheets were submitted to Mrs Deaton on about 20th of each month. The days of the month after 20th were filled out on the time sheets initially having regard to the anticipated rota’d hours for each

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

member of the staff. We accept Mrs Deaton’s evidence that what was expected was that if the hours varied, that staff were expected to amend their time sheets. Again, this is obvious and common sense. This was clearly necessary for C2 and C3 as they had to keep an accurate record for the purpose of their annualised hours contracts. We note that there appeared to be no attempt by C2 to reconcile the anomalies of her time sheet for 23 September (or on any other day), if that was the reason for the initial inaccuracies. The claimants agreed that they did not go back and correct their time sheets as they said this was not standard practice. We do no agree.

124. In any event, we note that the majority of examples of anomalies relied upon by the club fell on days before the 20th of each month, and so ‘reconciliation’ issues were not relevant.

125. Further, we are satisfied that that C1 is not correct when he explains that he was simply checking the time sheets against the rotas. As stated, there are several examples within the schedules where the times claimed by C2 and C3 are not consistent with the rota’d times.

126. We find that the alarm system covered the kitchen area. This was not disputed. Neither was it denied by the claimants that they could not work if the alarm was activated. C1 admitted that it was often either him or other catering staff (i.e. C2 and C3) who would set and reset the alarm, albeit that others did sometimes set the alarms i.e cleaners and office staff.

127. We are satisfied that the alarm system was working accurately. It would have been important for the alarm to be working properly. We accept the evidence that Chubb were asked to certify that the time settings were correct, and did so. The repeated suggestion by the claimants (mainly C1) that alarm system was unreliable seems to us to have been without foundation. The claimants failed to provide any supporting evidence of malfunction beyond mere assertion.

128. The claimants provided their own reconciliation of time sheets against the alarm logs. This is in the supplemental bundle at pages 10-17. This was prepared by a friend of the claimants. We remain unsure what expertise, if any, this person has in terms of this sort of investigation. In any event, it is apparent that the schedule was prepared on the basis that it is helpful to identify days when the claimants worked less hours than the alarm was de- activated, and that these days can be used to offset the identified anomalies when they are alleged to have worked for more time than the alarm log suggests was possible.

129. In our view this approach is erroneous. Those days when they have claimed less than the alarmed time are not ‘under claims’ as the claimants put it. They have simply claimed for the time they were actually at work on the premises, which is the norm. The point being that in the normal course of events, someone working in the bar or catering area can only have worked less, or the same time as the period when the alarm was de-activated. This

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

analysis does not assist the claimant. If anything it shows a worrying failure to appreciate the concerns of the club in terms of time recording.

130. On 6 October 2023, C1 submitted an email requesting that C2 and C3 move to an annual salary i.e. away from the annualised hours contracts they were currently on [173]. We do not think that much rests on this saver to observe that it puts into context C1’s reticence to admit that he was aware of C2 and C3 contractual status.

131. On 13 October 2023, the claimants were all three called into a meeting with Mr Dean and Mrs Deaton. This was, in effect, an investigation meeting. We find that the claimants were not put on notice of the purpose of the meeting, and had not been furnished with the information relied upon by the club in advance. We accept that in the broadest terms, what was discussed in this meeting is accurately summarised in the document at [194]. It would have been desirable if there had been a contemporaneous note of such an important meeting, and that any record be more comprehensive. However, we are satisfied that the claimants had an opportunity to provide an explanation for the anomalies on the time sheets set out above. We accept that the meeting would have been challenging and embarrassing for the claimants. However, we do not accept that the representatives of the club behaved inappropriately in this meeting, or in any other. We accept the evidence of the club’s witnesses on this point, not least after having had the opportunity to assess each of their characters and demeanours. It is clear to us that if there was a protagonist at this meetings, then it appears to have been C1, however well intended he may have been.

132. On 17 October 2023, the claimant each raised a grievance, raising race discrimination, management intimidation, misuse of power and blackmail. They also make reference to racial slurs, albeit not particularised. it cited the meeting on 13 October 2023 as an example of these issues. The three grievances are in the same terms. They appear in the bundle at [183], [220] and [334].

133. In the Tribunal’s view, these grievances are problematic for the claimants. As stated, they are identical. We accept that they were a joint effort between the claimants, although we find that they were primarily the work of C1. In our judgment, the grievances are not a genuine attempt to express complaints at the time. The claimants all variously admitted that there had been no attempt to ‘’blackmail them by the club. Further, they also admitted that there had been no ‘racial slurs’. It is our view that these two very serious allegations were entirely fabricated by the claimants at the time of the grievance. In the context of this type of case, the apparently casual way that the claimants abandoned these allegations was very worrying and surprising.

134. These were allegations of a serious criminal offence and race discrimination. One can hardly imagine anything more serious. They were false. The making of these allegations was consistent with the way C1 conducted much of the disciplinary process i.e. in a rather combative way.

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

It does beggar the question as to why he would have chosen to adopt this approach if he genuinely believes that there were reasonable explanations for the discrepancies raised by the club. In the case of C2 and C3, it hardly seemed satisfactory to explain that C1 had drafted the wording of the grievances. They had put their names to it and were presumably aware that they contained accusations with vey little, if any substance. As a result, it has undermined the credibility of the claimants, and we have placed considerably less weight on their testimony as a result.

135. We find that the grievances were largely opportunistic. The club was fair and reasonable in approaching them on this basis, especially after the letter of 6 September and the meeting of 29 September 2023 with C1. The timing of the grievances was significant. In our judgment, it was aimed at deflecting attention from the primary issue facing the claimants, namely the manner in which time sheets had been completed. Where there was some factual truth to the matters raised, we find that the claimants were rehashing old complaints which had been previous dealt with by the club.

136. The underlying argument behind the grievances was that the club had dealt with the various issues raised by, and to do with the claimants, in an inconsistent way, and that this was evidence of a lack of fairness and/or discrimination towards the claimants, and particularly C1. We do not agree. It seems to us that the approach by the club in relation to the bullying allegation in May/June was dealt within a reasonable range. Members of the club were given a final written warning. These were very different allegations against non-employees. The claimants appeared to accept this outcome at the time. No find no relevant inconsistency of approach here.

137. The Tribunal was at first surprised that Guy Welsh was dealt with informally given the nature of the allegations i.e. potentially of sexual assault. However, we had limited information as to the context of the allegations. We also note that C1 was not disciplined for similar behaviour towards Mr Broomfield. In large part it seems that this aspect of the case appears to have shaped the approach of Mr Vanner and the attitude to the outcome of C1. As a result, in our view there is little evidence of material inconsistent here. We note again that it was a very different situation, and different decision makers.

138. The grievance also highlighted the ‘spoon bending’ incident. This again was a very different allegation to either those relating to the bullying, Mr Welsh, or those against the claimants relating to time sheets. It was also a different decision maker. C1 accepted what was alleged. He was given a first written warning which did not seem excessive to us. We could see no apparent or relevant inconsistency arising from the way this matter had been dealt with by the club.

139. The claimant were suspended on 18 October 2023. As stated above, there were disciplinary hearings held for all three on 7 November 2023, chaired by Mr Clayton. In terms of the content of these hearings, the Tribunal

Case Numbers: 3300596/2024; 3300597/2024; 3300598/2024

accepts that the minutes adduced by the club are broadly accurate, and reflect the tone and content of what was stated by the participants.

140. As stated, the claimants were dismissed on 8 November 2023 ostensibly on the grounds of gross misconduct. The letters of dismissal were sent by to the claimants by email. We are satisfied that there was a genuine attempt to hold further face to face meetings with the claimants on 8 November. We find that there was some confusion on Mr Clayton’s part as to the timing of those meetings. We also find that the claimants had not intended to attend those meetings in any event. They declined to take telephone calls from Mr Clayton when he tried to call them on 8 November to resolve the confusion. This aspect of events was not significant in our view.