RESERVED JUDGMENT

1. The complaint of unfavourable treatment because of something arising in consequence of disability is well-founded and succeeds.

2. The complaint of failure to make reasonable adjustments for disability is well- founded and succeeds.

3. The complaint of harassment related to disability is well-founded and succeeds.

4. The complaint of indirect disability discrimination is not well-founded and are dismissed.

5. The remedy to which the Claimant is entitled will be determined at a Remedy Hearing to take place in person at the Norwich Employment Tribunal on 11 and 12 May 2026. Case Number: 3307564/2023.

REASONS

Background

1. Mr Gallop was employed by the Respondent Police Force from 20 April 2015 to 27 September 2023, latterly in the role of Investigator in the Domestic Abuse Team. Early Conciliation was between 19 April and 25 May 2023. The claim form was presented on 1 July 2023 in which Mr Gallop brought a claim of disability discrimination. He was represented by solicitors at the time.

2. The case came before Employment Judge Anderson for case management at a preliminary hearing on 15 January 2024. By then, Mr Gallop was acting in person. On 8 January 2023, Mr Gallop submitted an application to amend to include a complaint of unfair dismissal. He had also submitted a draft List of Issues which included the unfair dismissal claim and additional allegations of discrimination. In light of the lack of clarity in the application to amend, EJ Anderson ordered Mr Gallop to provide further information. He also listed the case for a seven day final hearing in March 2025.

3. The matter came before Employment Judge R Lewis for further case management on 16 April 2024. He refused Mr Gallop’s application to amend to include a complaint of unfair dismissal. The application to amend in respect of additional allegations in the disability discrimination claim was not opposed and was granted. The List of Issues prepared by the parties was approved, subject to incorporating the amendments permitted by EJ Lewis. The case was listed for a ten day Hearing on 16 – 27 June 2025.

4. Due to the lack of resources, this final hearing was unable to commence as scheduled on 16 June 2025 and the first five days were lost. This Tribunal convened on 23 June. During that first week we read into the case and heard Mr Gallop’s evidence, taking us through to Friday 27 June 2025. We then reconvened week commencing 24 November 2025, during which we heard the Respondent’s evidence and the parties’ closing submissions, commencing our deliberations in Chambers on Friday 28 November 2025. We continued our deliberations on 10 and 11 December, delivering this Judgment to the parties on 12 December 2025.

Evidence

5. We had before us a Bundle running to page 2218, properly paginated and indexed. We also had a Core Bundle consisting of 199 pages. We further had a Supplementary Bundle running to page number 77.

6. We had before us witness statements as follows:

6.1 Mr Gallop; Case Number: 3307564/2023.
6.2 Mrs S Johnson, HR Advisor;
6.3 Miss S Wright, Detective Sergeant and Mr Gallop’s Line Manager;
6.4 Mrs A Scott, Chief Superintendent at the time, now Assistant Chief Constable, Suffolk Constabulary, heard the Grievance Appeal;
6.5 Mr L Provart, Chief Superintendent and Dismissing Officer; and
6.6 Mr D Buckley, Chief Superintendent at the time, now Acting Assistant Chief Constable, Norfolk Constabulary, heard the Dismissal Appeal.

7. Before the hearing commenced, we read the witness statements and read or looked at in our discretion, the documents referred to. I made it clear that we had not read everything and explained, (in particular to Mr Gallop) that it was important to take us to those passages in the documents the parties considered to be important, during cross examination of witnesses.

The Issues

8. We were provided with an Agreed List of Issues at the outset of the hearing, which both parties confirmed we could rely upon. It is set out in something of a cumbersome format, but it was sufficient for the purposes of this hearing and served to identify the allegations relied upon by Mr Gallop. During the course of the hearing, Mr Gallop withdrew some of his claims and allegations. I set out below the Agreed List of Issues, with agreed amendments, (showing deletions following Mr Gallop’s withdrawals).

Time Limits (s.123 Equality Act 2010)

1. The Claimant commenced the Early Conciliation process with ACAS on 19 April 2023 (Day A). The Early Conciliation Certificate was issued on 25 May 2023 (Day B). The claim form was presented on 1 July 2023. Accordingly, any act or omission which took place before 26 February 2023 (which allows for any extension under the Early Conciliation provisions) is potentially out of time so that the Tribunal may not have jurisdiction to hear that complaint.

2. Were the complaints made within the time limit in section 123 of the Equality Act 2010? The Tribunal will decide:

a. Was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus Early Conciliation extension) of the act or omission to which the complaint relates?
b. If not, was there conduct extending over a period?
c. If so, was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus Early Conciliation extension) of the end of that period?
d. If not, were the claims made within a further period that the Tribunal thinks is just and equitable? The Tribunal will decide: Case Number: 3307564/2023.
i. Why were the complaints not made to the Tribunal in time?
ii. In any event, is it just and equitable in all the circumstances to extend time? Disability (s.6 Equality Act 2010

3. It is accepted that the Claimant suffers from depression and ME / CFS and that each condition would meet the criteria for disability under section 6 of the Equality Act 2010. The Respondent admits that the Claimant was disabled by one or both of the conditions at the time of the alleged discriminatory treatment, e.g. from October 2021.

Direct Disability Discrimination (s.13 Equality Act 2010)

4. Did the Respondent decline to provide the Claimant with equipment to work from home whilst absent due to ill health and if so, why?

5. Would the Respondent have declined to provide a non-disabled employee with equipment to work from home whilst absent due to ill health in the same circumstances? Discrimination arising from disability (s.15 Equality Act 2010

6. Did the Claimant’s disability cause, have the consequence of, or result in, his sickness absence levels?

7. Did the Respondent treat the Claimant unfavourably because of his sickness absence levels, in:

a. Requiring the Claimant to attend a Stage 1 formal meeting on 23 February 2022;
b. Issuing a 12 month formal written warning and Improvement Plan;
c. Requiring the Claimant to comply with standard absence management triggers;
d. Failing / declining to distinguish between absence related to disability and that related to general illness when assessing levels of absence and applying formal stage triggers;
e. Notifying the Claimant that he was being moved to Stage 2 of the Capability process on 14 April 2022;
f. Failing to respond to the Claimant’s email of concern about being moved to Stage 2 of the Capability process;
g. Formally notifying the Claimant that he was being moved to Stage 2 of the Capability process on 1 June 2022;
h. Proceeding to Stage 2 of the Capability process despite the Claimant’s return to work being scheduled for 8 June 2022; Case Number: 3307564/2023.
i. Requiring the Claimant to have no more than two occurrences of sickness (each lasting no more than two days) from 21 July 2022 to 1 May 2023;
j. Requiring the Claimant to undertake a phased return of less than 3 months, in order to return to full time hours by 10 October 2022;
k. Formally notifying the Claimant that he was being moved to Stage 3 of the capability process, which would entail a Final Capability Hearing resulting in possible dismissal, on 20 October 2022;
l. Taking 173 days to address the Claimant’s Grievance and Appeal;
m. Failing to properly address the matters raised in the Claimants Grievance in the Grievance Outcome dated 26 January 2023;
n. Failing to properly address the matters raised in the Claimant’s Grievance Appeal in the Grievance Appeal Outcome dated 19 April 2023;
o. Failing to properly address the matters raised in the Claimant’s Grievance Appeal at the Grievance Appeal Outcome meeting on 2 May 2023;
p. Proceeding to Stage 3 of the Capability process;
q. Dismissing the Claimant; and
r. Rejecting the Claimant’s Appeal against dismissal?

8. If so, was the treatment a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim in each case?

9. Did the Claimant’s disability cause, have the consequence of, or result in, the need for an appropriate, gradual and individually tailored Return to Work Plan?

10. Did the Respondent treat the Claimant unfavourably because of his need for an appropriate, gradual and individually tailored Return to Work Plan, in:

a. Refusing or declining to follow the advice of the Specialist ME Clinic;
b. Refusing or declining to follow the advice of a Physiotherapist funded by the Respondent;
c. Refusing or declining to follow the advice of the Respondent’s Force Medical Advisor (FMA);
d. Refusing or declining to allow the Claimant the opportunity to follow a suitably sustainable Return to Work Plan; and
e. Concluding within the Grievance that the ME Clinic advice had changed during the process?

11. If so, was the treatment a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim in each case? Case Number: 3307564/2023.

12. Did the Claimant’s disability cause, have the consequence of, or result in, absence from the office?

13. Did the Respondent treat the Claimant unfavourably because of his absence from the office, in not allowing the Claimant to work from home when he requested it in December 2021?

14. If so, was the treatment a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim?

15. Did the Claimant’s disability cause, have the consequence of, or result in, the inability to always attend appointments?

16. Did the Respondent treat the Claimant unfavourably because of his inability to always attend appointments, in:

a. Citing a failure to attend an appointment with Workplace Health as one of the reasons for moving the Claimant to Stage 1 of the Formal Capability process in 2022;
b. Using a single incident to establish a narrative of the Claimant failing to take personal responsibility for his health; and
c. Citing a failure to attend an appointment with Workplace Health as a reason for the Claimant’s dismissal?

17. If so, was the treatment a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim in each case?

18. Did the Claimant’s disability cause, have the consequence of, or result in, increased stress in relation to the Respondent’s treatment of the Claimant?

19. Did the Respondent treat the Claimant unfavourably because of his increased stress by citing his ongoing ill health as a reason for no longer being able to support him as an employee?

20. If so, was the treatment a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim?

21. Did the Claimant’s disability cause, have the consequence of, or result in, exacerbation of symptoms in relation to the Respondent’s treatment of the Claimant?

22. Did the Respondent treat the Claimant unfavourably because of his exacerbated symptoms by citing his ongoing ill health as a reason for no longer being able to support him as an employee?

23. If so, was the treatment a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim?

24. Did the Claimant’s disability cause, have the consequence of, or result in, an inability to attend a meeting on 11 August 2023?

25. Did the Respondent treat the Claimant unfavourably because of his inability to attend the meeting, in not taking the Claimant’s availability into account when rescheduling the meeting? Case Number: 3307564/2023.

26. If so, was the treatment a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim?

Indirect Disability Discrimination (s.19 Equality Act 2010

27. Does the Respondent’s requirement for employees to maintain a specified level of attendance at work (as per the Respondent’s Sickness Absence Management Policy and Capability (Attendance and Performance) Policy) amount to a provision, criterion, or practice which put the Claimant and persons with his disability at a particular disadvantage, given that:

a. The Claimant was put through a Formal Capability process as a result; and
b. The Claimant pushed himself to follow return to work plans set by the Respondent, which the Claimant felt were unsustainable?

28. If so, was the requirement to maintain consistent attendance a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim?

29. Does the Respondent’s requirement for employees to comply with a Return to Work Plan amount to a provision, criterion, or practice which put the Claimant and persons with his disability at a particular disadvantage, given that the Claimant was not able to adhere to the Plan as a result of his conditions?

30. If so, was the requirement to comply with Return to Work Plans which the Claimant felt were unsustainable a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim?

31. Does the Respondent’s use of standard absence triggers (as per the Respondent’s Sickness Absence Management Policy) amount to a provision, criterion, or practice which put the Claimant and persons with his disability at a particular disadvantage and if so, were the standard absence triggers applied to the Claimant?

32. If so, was the requirement to comply with standard absence triggers a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim?

33. Does the Respondent’s Policy that recuperative duties should not last longer than 12 weeks (as per the Respondent’s Sickness Absence Management Policy) amount to a provision, criterion, or practice which put the Claimant and persons with his disability at a particular disadvantage, given that the Claimant was not able to successfully complete a phased return to work, returning to full hours, within 12 weeks and was therefore put through a Formal Capability process?

34. If so, is the Policy that recuperative duties should not last longer than 12 weeks a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim?

35. Does the Respondent’s requirement for an employee to return to work for at least four hours a day during a phased return amount to a provision, criterion, or practice which put the Claimant and persons with his disability at a particular disadvantage, in view of the medical advice and given that the Claimant was not able to work for at least four hours a day?

36. If so, is the requirement to work for at least four hours a day during a phased return a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim? Case Number: 3307564/2023.

37. Does the Respondent have a requirement for an employee to use annual leave, in order to return on fewer than five days a week during a phased return?

38. If so, does this requirement amount to a provision, criterion, or practice which put the Claimant and persons with his disability at a particular disadvantage, given that the Claimant was not able to return for five days a week?

39. If so, is the requirement to use annual leave, in order to return on fewer than five days a week during a phased return, a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim?

40. Did the Respondent fail to apply its Capability (Attendance and Performance) Policy to the Claimant in declining to reschedule the Stage 3 meeting at a date convenient to the Claimant?

41. If so, did this failure amount to a provision, criterion, or practice which put the Claimant and persons with his disability at a particular disadvantage, given that the Claimant was not able to attend the rescheduled meeting?

42. If so, is the failure to reschedule the Stage 3 meeting at a date convenient to the Claimant a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim?

43. Does the Respondent’s practice of considering historic absence data in making a decision to dismiss at Stage 3 of a capability process, amount to a provision, criterion, or practice which put the Claimant and persons with his disability at a particular disadvantage, given that the Claimant had been subject to the Formal Capability process in 2017 / 18?

44. If so, is consideration of historic absence data, in making a decision to dismiss at Stage 3 of a Capability process, a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim? Failure to make reasonable adjustments (§.20-21 Equality Act 2010

45. Did the Respondent’s requirement that an employee should not be on recuperative duties, or a phased return, for more than 12 weeks put the Claimant at a substantial disadvantage in comparison with those who are not disabled?

46. If so, did the Respondent take such steps as it is reasonable to take to avoid the disadvantage by:

a. Proposing reasonable Return to Work Programmes for the Claimant, with reference to medical advice;
b. Providing support for the Claimant through regular meetings;
c. Extending the 12 week period;
d. Suggesting a reduction in contracted hours for the Claimant; and
e. Considering whether a career break or medical redeployment might assist the Claimant? Case Number: 3307564/2023.

47. Did the Respondent’s requirement that the Claimant work in the office for his role, rather than from home, put the Claimant at a substantial disadvantage in comparison with those who are not disabled?

48. If so, did the Respondent take such steps as it is reasonable to take to avoid the disadvantage, considering whether:

a. The Respondent had sufficient equipment to facilitate all employees to work from home during the Covid-19 pandemic;
b. Support for the Claimant’s return to work and reintegration following a lengthy absence would be necessary; and
c. There was medical evidence to suggest that the Claimant would have been able to work from home?

49. Did the Respondent’s application of the Capability Policy put the Claimant at a substantial disadvantage in comparison with those who are not disabled, in view of his dismissal?

50. If so, did the Respondent take such steps as it is reasonable to take to avoid the disadvantage, considering whether the Respondent:

a. Reset trigger points for the Claimant;
b. Extended trigger points for the Claimant;
c. Considered alternatives to dismissal;
d. Acted in a timely manner in regard to the Claimant’s requests for support; and
e. Acted in relation to time frames indicated within Policy documents?

51. Did the Respondent’s application of the Capability (Attendance and Performance) Policy put the Claimant at a substantial disadvantage in comparison with those who are not disabled, in view of the initial delay in convening the Stage 3 Third Formal Capability (Attendance) Meeting?

52. If so, did the Respondent take such steps as it is reasonable to take to avoid the disadvantage?

53. In addition, did the Respondent take such steps as it is reasonable to take to avoid any disadvantage to the Claimant by:

a. Resetting trigger points for the Claimant;
b. Extending trigger points for the Claimant;
c. Providing flexibility of shift start times for the Claimant;
d. Suggesting a reduction in contracted hours for the Claimant; Case Number: 3307564/2023.
e. Proposing reasonable Return to Work Programmes for the Claimant, with reference to medical advice;
f. Providing support for the Claimant through regular meetings; and
g. Considering whether a career break or medical redeployment might assist the Claimant?

54. Did the Respondent fail to fulfil its duties under the Public Sector Equality Act in relation to making reasonable adjustments?

55. If so, did this failure result in the Claimant’s dismissal?

Harassment (s.26 Equality Act 2010)

56. Did the Respondent undermine the Claimant’s attempts to return to work successfully and sustainably by creating an environment of inevitable failure in which the Claimant’s efforts were measured against improper metrics?

57. If so, did the conduct have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

58. If not, did the conduct reasonably have the effect of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

59. Did the Respondent repeatedly ask for “further medical guidance”, ask the Claimant to suggest reasonable adjustments and consistently refuse to follow the existing medical advice?

60. If so, did the conduct have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

61. If not, did the conduct reasonably have the effect of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

62. Did the Respondent deny the Claimant to be accompanied to meetings by his wife?

63. If so, did the conduct have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

64. If not, did the conduct reasonably have the effect of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

65. Did the Respondent set unrealistic attendance targets for the Claimant, creating the inevitability of advancing the Claimant through the formal capability procedures with the ultimate aim of dismissal? Case Number: 3307564/2023.

66. If so, did the conduct have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

67. If not, did the conduct reasonably have the effect of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

68. Did the Respondent repeatedly emphasise that the Claimant missing one appointment with Workplace Health demonstrated a lack in taking responsibility, without acknowledging why the appointment was missed or what was to be gained from the appointment?

69. If so, did the conduct have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

70. If not, did the conduct reasonably have the effect of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

71. Did the Respondent’s failure to respond to an email of 19 April 2022 from the Claimant, which informed the Respondent that their actions were resulting in the Claimant feeling bullied, have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

72. If not, did the conduct reasonably have the effect of violating the Claimant's dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

73. Did the Respondent assert it has done nothing wrong to contribute to the ill health of the Claimant?

74. If so, did the conduct have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

75. If not, did the conduct reasonably have the effect of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

76. Did the Respondent misread and misrepresent the advice of the ME / CFS Service?

77. If so, did the conduct have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

78. If not, did the conduct reasonably have the effect of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant? Case Number: 3307564/2023.

79. Did the Respondent assert that the Claimant would “not accept any decision that does not align exactly with the medical advice”?

80. If so, did the conduct have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

81. If not, did the conduct reasonably have the effect of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

82. Did the Respondent allege that the Claimant would not accept any plan that was not on full pay?

83. If so, did the conduct have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

84. If not, did the conduct reasonably have the effect of violating the Claimant’s dignity, or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant? Remedy (§.124 & 139 Equality Act 2010, s.207A Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992)

85. Did the Claimant suffer financial loss attributable to an act(s) of discrimination by the Respondent?

86. Has the Claimant taken reasonable steps to mitigate any such financial loss?

87. Did the Claimant suffer injury to feelings attributable to an act(s) of discrimination by the Respondent?

88. Should the Respondent be Ordered to pay compensation to the Claimant?

89. If so:

a. Is the Claimant entitled to be awarded an uplift on such compensation for an unreasonable failure by the Respondent to comply with the ACAS Code of Practice on Disciplinary and Grievance Procedures? And
b. Should interest be awarded?

90. Is the Claimant entitled to a declaration that he was subject to disability discrimination by the Respondent?

91. Should a recommendation be made that the Respondent take specified steps for the benefit of the Claimant Case Number: 3307564/2023.

The Law

Disability Discrimination

9. Disability is a protected characteristic pursuant to s.4 of the Equality Act 2010.

10. Section 39(2)(c) and (d) proscribes discrimination by an employer by either dismissing an employee or subjecting him to any other detriment.

11. Detriment was defined in Shamoon v Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary [2003] IRLR 285 the Tribunal has to find that by reason of the act or acts complained of, a reasonable worker would or might take the view that he or she had been disadvantaged in the circumstances in which he or she had thereafter to work.

12. Section 39(5) imposes a duty on an employer to make reasonable adjustments.

13. Section 40 prohibits harassment by an employer.

The Burden of Proof

14. In respect of the burden of proof, s.136 reads as follows: “(2) If there are facts from which the court could decide, in the absence of any other explanation, that a person (A) contravened the provision concerned, the court must hold that the contravention occurred;

(3) But subsection (2) does not apply if A shows that A did not contravene the provision.”

15. The Court of Appeal gave guidance on how to apply the equivalent provision of s.136 under the previous discrimination legislation, in the case of Igen Ltd v Wong and Others [2005] IRLR 258. There, the Court of Appeal set out a series of guidance steps, that guidance may still be relied upon, see Underhill LJ at paragraph 14 in Greater Manchester Police v Bailey [2017] EWCA Civ 425. We have carefully observed those steps in this case.

16. This does not mean that we should only consider the Claimant’s evidence at the first stage; a Tribunal should consider all the evidence at the first stage in order to make findings of primary fact and assess whether there is a prima facie case. There is a difference between factual evidence and explanation, (which is considered at the second stage). See Madarassy v Nomura International plc [2007] IRLR 246 CA.

17. In Hewage v Grampian Health Board [2012] UKSC 37 Lord Hope of Craighead said: Case Number: 3307564/2023. “It is important not to make too much of the burden of proof provisions. They will require careful attention where there is room for doubt as to the facts necessary to establish discrimination. But they have nothing to offer where the tribunal is in a position to make positive findings on the evidence one way or the other.”

18. Having said that, HHJ Tayler cautioned in Field v Steve Pye and Co limited & Others [2022] EAT 68: “Although it is legitimate to move straight to the second stage, there is something to be said for an employment tribunal considering why it is choosing that option “

Reasonable Adjustments

19. Section 20 defines the duty to make reasonable adjustments, which comprises three possible requirements, the first of which might apply in this case set out at subsection (3) as follows:- “(3) The first requirement is a requirement, where a provision criterion or practice of A’s puts a disabled person at a substantial disadvantage in relation to a relevant matter in comparison with persons who are not disabled, to take such steps as it is reasonable to have to take to avoid the disadvantage”

20. Section 21 provides that a failure to comply with such requirements is a failure to make a reasonable adjustment, which amounts to discrimination.

21. There are five steps to establishing a failure to make reasonable adjustments (as identified in the pre-Equality Act 2010 cases of Environment Agency v Rowan [2008] IRLR 20 and HM Prison Service v Johnson [2007] IRLR 951). The Tribunal must identify:

21.1 The relevant provision criterion or practice applied by or on behalf of the employer;
21.2 The identity of non-disabled comparators, (where appropriate);
21.3 The nature and extent of the substantial disadvantage suffered by the disabled employee;
21.4 The steps the employer is said to have failed to take, and
21.5 Whether it was reasonable to take that step.

22. The Equality and Human Rights Commission: Code of Practice on Employment (2011) at paragraph 4.5 suggests that PCP should be construed widely so as to include for example, formal or informal policies, rules, practices, arrangements, criteria, conditions, prerequisites, qualifications or provisions. It may also be a decision to do something in the future or a one off decision. Case Number: 3307564/2023.

23. The decision of Mrs Justice Simler DBE, (then President) in Lamb v the Business Academy Bexley UKEAT/0226/JOJ assists with identifying what is and what is not, a PCP. The phrase is to be construed broadly, having regard to the statute’s purpose of eliminating discrimination against those who suffer from disability. It may in certain circumstances include one-off decisions, (paragraph 26). She approved though, the comments of the former President, Langstaff J in Nottingham City Transport Ltd v Harvey UKEAT/0032/12 where he referred to, “practice” as having an element of repetition. In the former case, a teacher was dismissed after a long period of absence during which a grievance was investigated and an outcome provided. The PCP was the requirement to return to work without a proper and fair investigation. There were repeated failures to properly investigate and repeated delays; that was a practice. In the latter case, a claimant suffering from depression, returning to work and confused by a new swipe card system, altered his time sheet. The EAT held that the one-off application of a flawed disciplinary procedure did not amount to a, “practice”. More recently in Ishola v Transport for London 2020 EWCA Civ 112, CA, Lady Justice Simler, (as she now is) affirmed that approach, the Court of Appeal holding that the words provision criterion or practice carry the connotation of a state of affairs indicating how similar cases will be treated in the future; a one off act can amount to a practice if there is some indication that it would be repeated if similar circumstances were to arise in the future. She said at paragraph 35 that the words: “…are not terms of art but ordinary English words … they are broad and overlapping… not to be narrowly construed or unjustifiably limited in their application”. She also said at paragraph 37, that not every unfair act amounts to a PCP. If such an act is found not to be direct discrimination, it would be wrong by a process of abstraction, to seek to convert it into the application of a PCP.

24. It is important for the claimant to identify the PCP relied upon and for the Tribunal to makes its decision on the PCP advanced by the claimant, see Secretary of State for Justice v Prospere UKEAT/0412/14.

25. In cases of absence management, the PCP ought not simply be described as, “the absence management policy”, particularly if the policy itself provided for allowances in the case of disability, but even if it did not, what the claimant should do is identify why the policy in certain circumstances adversely affected the disabled employees such as the claimant. See Griffiths v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2017] ICR 160 CA. In that case, as will be so in many cases, the PCP is the requirement to maintain a certain level of attendance in order to avoid the risk of disciplinary sanction. A disabled person is thereby disadvantaged because he or she would be more likely to be absent through ill health and would therefore find it harder to comply with the PCP.

26. Claimants are not required to prove that they were disadvantaged, it is not a test of causation, it is a comparative exercise to test whether the PCP Case Number: 3307564/2023. has the effect of disadvantaging the disabled Claimant more than trivially in comparison with others who are not disabled, see Sheikholeslami v University of Edinburgh 2018 IRLR 1090.

27. The obligation to make reasonable adjustments is on the employer. That means that it must consider for itself what adjustments can be made, thus for example in Cosgrove v Caesar and Howie [2001] IRLR 653 the duty was not discharged simply because the Claimant and her GP had not come up with what adjustments could be made. An employer that does not make enquiries as to what might be done to ameliorate the disabled persons disadvantage, runs the risk that it fails to make a reasonable adjustment. That is not the same as saying that there is an obligation to consult, just that the failure to do so, or to inform oneself of the relevant facts and reflect on them, runs the risk of placing oneself in the position where a breach of the obligation to make reasonable adjustment occurs, out of ignorance, (see Tarbuck v Sainsbury’s Supermarkets Ltd [2006] IRLR 664).

28. The duty is to make “reasonable” adjustments, to take such steps as it is reasonable for the employer to take to avoid the disadvantage. The test is objective. Our focus should be not on the process followed by the employer to reach its decision but on practical outcomes and whether there is an adjustment that should be considered reasonable. It is for the tribunal to determine, objectively, what is reasonable. It is not a matter of what the employer reasonably believed. Unusually, the tribunal may substitute its view for that of the employer and it is permissible for the tribunal to conclude that different adjustments would have been reasonable from those contended for by the Claimant: see Smith v Churchills Stairlifts Plc [2006] ICR 524 CA; Royal Bank of Scotland v Ashton [2011] ICR 632 EAT; Garrett v LIDL Ltd UKEAT 0541/08; Southampton City College v Randal IRLR 2006 18; Project Management Institute v Latiff [2007] IRLR 579.

29. The EHRC Code at paragraph 6.28 sets out examples of matters we might take into account in evaluating whether proposed steps are reasonable as follows:

29.1 The effectiveness in preventing the substantial disadvantage;
29.2 Its practicability;
29.3 The financial and other costs and the extent of any disruptions that may be caused;
29.4 The employer’s financial or other resources;
29.5 The availability of financial or other assistance, (eg through Access to Work), and
29.6 The type and size of the employer. Case Number: 3307564/2023.

30. The effectiveness of a proposed adjustment is one of the factors to be evaluated by the tribunal; it is sufficient for the Claimant to raise the issue for there to be a chance that the step would avoid the disadvantage: South Staffordshire & Shropshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust v Billingsley (UKEAT/0341/15/DM) at [17]-[18].

31. The effectiveness of a proposed adjustment should be assessed on the basis of the evidence available at the time. Medical evidence obtained afterwards is only relevant in so far as it helps with assessing the likelihood of the adjustment being effective, Brightman v TIAA Limited UKEAT 0318/2019.

32. In Griffiths v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2017] ICR 160 Elias LJ said: “So far as efficacy is concerned, it may be that it is not clear whether the step proposal will be effective or not. It may still be reasonable to take the step notwithstanding that success is not guaranteed; the uncertainty is one of the factors to weigh up when assessing the question of reasonableness.”

33. The more practical an adjustment is to implement, the more likely it is to be reasonable. A step that is recommended or contemplated in an employer’s own policies is likely to be practical. An adjustment which is recommended in an employer’s own policy is one that is likely, at least as a starting point, to be a reasonable adjustment to make: see Linsley v Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs (UKEAT/0150/18/JOJ) (7 December 2018) at [24]. One should expect a good reason for departing from such a policy; ignorance by the relevant managers is not a good reason: see Linsley at [24]-[25].

34. In Cordell v Foreign and Commonwealth Office 2012 ICR 280 EAT the EAT gave useful guidance on the significance of the cost of a proposed adjustment. That might include the size of any budget allocated to reasonable adjustments, how much has been spent in similar situations, what other employers are prepared to spend in similar situations, and any policies set out in collective agreements. The tribunal makes a judgment on what it considers right, as an industrial jury. The significance of cost might also depend on what the Respondent might otherwise have to spend, for example in retraining or recruiting others.

35. The resources, financial and otherwise, available to the employer are relevant as is its size.

36. The effect of an adjustment on others is relevant. But one should not forget that employers are under a statutory obligation to take positive action.

37. On the question of comparators, the Code states at 6.16 that the purpose of comparison with people who are not disabled is to establish whether it is a PCP, physical feature or lack of auxiliary aid that places the disabled Case Number: 3307564/2023. person at a disadvantage and therefore there is no need to identify a comparator whose circumstances are the same as the Claimants, (in contrast to such a requirement in claims of direct and indirect discrimination). Simler P observed in Sheikholeslami v University of Edinburgh [2018] IRLR 1090 at [48]-[49] that it is a question of whether the PCP bites harder on the Claimant, she said: “Whether there is a substantial disadvantage as a result of the application of a PCP in a particular case is a question of fact assessed on an objective basis and measured by comparison with what the position would be if the disabled person in question did not have a disability.”

38. The burden of proof was explained by Elias J in Project Management Institute v Latif UKEAT/0028/07CEA at [54]: the Claimant must establish that a duty to make reasonable adjustments has arisen and that there are facts from which it could reasonably be inferred, absent an explanation, that it has been breached. Once that is established, the burden is reversed to the Respondent to show that the proposed adjustment is not reasonable.

Disability Related Discrimination

39. Disability Related discrimination is defined at s.15 as follows:

(1) A person (A) discriminates against a disabled person (B) if—

(a) A treats B unfavourably because of something arising in consequence of B's disability, and
(b) A cannot show that the treatment is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.

(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if A shows that A did not know, and could not reasonably have been expected to know, that B had the disability.

40. Determining whether treatment is unfavourable does not require any element of comparison, as is required in deciding whether treatment is less favourable for the purposes of direct discrimination. There is a relatively low threshold of disadvantage for treatment to be regarded as unfavourable. It entails perhaps placing a hurdle in front of someone, creating a particular difficulty or disadvantage for a person, see Williams v Trustees of Swansea University Pension and Assurance Scheme [2019] UKSC.

41. As for the difference between making a reasonable adjustment and disability related discrimination, in General Dynamics v Carranza UKEAT 0107/14/1010 HHJ Richardson explained that reasonable adjustments are about preventing disadvantage, disability related discrimination is about making allowances for that persons disability. Case Number: 3307564/2023.

42. There are 2 separate causative steps: firstly, the disability has the consequence of causing something and secondly, the treatment complained of as unfavourable must be because of that particular something, (Basildon & Thurrock NHS Foundation Trust v Weerasinghe

UKEAT/0397/14/RN)

43. Simler P, (as she then was) reviewed the authorities and gave helpful guidance on the correct approach to s15 in Pnaiser v NHS England [2016] IRLR 170 which may be summarised as follows:

43.1 The tribunal should first identify whether the claimant was treated unfavourably and if so, by whom.
43.2 Secondly, the tribunal should determine what caused the treatment, focussing on the reason, (not motive) in the mind of the alleged discriminator, possibly requiring consideration of the conscious or unconscious thought processes of that person, but keeping in mind that the actual motive is irrelevant. There may be more than one cause of the treatment, the “something” need not be the main or sole reason, but it must have a significant, (more than trivial) influence and amount to an effective cause of the unfavourable treatment.
43.3 Thirdly, the tribunal must then determine whether the reason for the unfavourable treatment arose because of the claimant’s disability. There could be a range of, more than one, causal links. However, the more links there are, the harder it may be to establish the required connection. The question of causation is an objective test and does not entail consideration of the thought processes of the alleged discriminator. There is no requirement that the respondent know of the causal link between the disability and the, “something arising”.

44. If there has been such treatment, we should then go on to ask, as set out at s.15(1)(b), whether the unfavourable treatment can be justified. This requires us to determine:

44.1 Whether there was a legitimate aim, unrelated to discrimination;
44.2 Whether the treatment was capable of achieving that aim, and
44.3 Whether the treatment was a proportionate means of achieving that aim, having regard to the relevant facts and taking into account the possibility of other means of achieving that aim.

45. The test of whether there is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim, (often referred to as the justification test) mirrors similar provisions in other strands of discrimination, such as in respect of indirect discrimination under s19 of the Equality Act. There is however, a difference, in that in the context of disability related discrimination, one is Case Number: 3307564/2023. looking at the effect on the individual, whereas with indirect discrimination, one is looking at the effect on a group of people.

46. There is guidance in the Equality and Human Rights Commission’s Code of Practice on Employment, which reflects case law on objective justification in other strands of discrimination and which can be relied on in the context of disability related discrimination.

47. Thus, in Hensam v Ministry of Defence UKEAT/10067/14/DM the EAT applied the justification test as described in Hardys & Hansons Plc v Lax [2005] EWCA Civ 846. In Gray v University of Portsmouth UKEAT/0242/20 Mrs Justice Eady said that employment tribunals should carry out a critical evaluation, adopting the same approach as in indirect discrimination cases, following Hardys & Hansons. The test is objective. In assessing proportionality, the tribunal uses its own judgment, which must be based on a fair and detailed analysis of the working practices and business considerations involved, particularly the business needs of the employer. It is not a question of whether the view taken by the employer was one a reasonable employer would have taken. The obligation is on the employer to show that the treatment complained of is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. The employer must establish that it was pursuing a legitimate aim and that the measures it was taking were appropriate and legitimate. To demonstrate proportionality, the employer is not required to show that there was no alternative course of action, but that the measures taken were reasonably necessary.

48. The tribunal has to objectively balance the discriminatory effect of the treatment and the reasonable needs of the employer.

49. “Legitimate aim” and “proportionate means” are 2 separate issues and should not be conflated.

50. The tribunal must weigh out a quantitative and qualitative assessment of the discriminatory effect of the treatment, (University of Manchester v Jones [1993] ICR 474).

51. The tribunal should scrutinise the justification put forward by the Respondent, (per Sedley LJ in Allonby v Accrrington & Rosedale College [2001] ICR 189).

52. In the context of section 15, s136 and the provisions as to the burden of proof means that the claimant will have to show:

52.1 That he was disabled at the relevant time;
52.2 That he had been subjected to unfavourable treatment;
52.3 A link between the unfavourable treatment and the, “something”, and Case Number: 3307564/2023.
52.4 Evidence from which the tribunal could properly conclude that the, “something” was an effective cause of the unfavourable treatment.

53. It the claimant proves facts from which the tribunal could conclude that there was section 15 discrimination in this way, the burden of proof shifts to the respondent to prove a non-discriminatory explanation, or justification.

Indirect Discrimination

54. Indirect discrimination is defined at s.19 as follows: “(1) A person (A) discriminates against another (B) if A applies to B a provision, criterion or practice which is discriminatory in relation to a relevant protected characteristic of B’s.

(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a provision, criterion or practice is discriminatory in relation to a relevant protected characteristic of B’s if –

(a) A applies, or would apply, it to persons with whom B does not share the characteristic,
(b) it puts, or would put, persons with whom B shares the characteristic at a particular disadvantage when compared with persons with whom B does not share it,
(c) it puts, or would put, B at that disadvantage, and
(d) A cannot show it to be a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.”

55. The effect of s.136 is that it is for the claimant to show prima facie the existence of a provision, criterion or practice, (PCP) and that such PCP placed the claimant’s group sharing his protected characteristic at a disadvantage as compared to another group that does not share his protected characteristic and that the PCP was applied to the claimant which resulted in his being subjected to that disadvantage. These are primary facts which the tribunal has to find before the burden of proof shifts to the respondent, see Project Management Institute v Latif [2007] IRLR 579 and Bethnal Green and Shoreditch Education Trust v Jeanne Dippenaar UKEAT/0064/15/JOJ.

56. Section 6 (3) provides that in relation to disability, reference to a person with a particular protected characteristic, or a shared protected characteristic, is reference to a particular, or the same, disability.

57. The obligation is on the employer to show that the PCP complained of is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim, (“objective justification”). The employer must establish that it was pursuing a legitimate aim and that the measures it was taking were appropriate and legitimate. The relevant law is discussed above in the context of disability Case Number: 3307564/2023. related discrimination. In the context of indirect discrimination we are looking at the effect on a group of people, not on an individual.

Harassment

58. Harassment is defined at s.26:

“(1) A person (A) harasses another (B) if—

(a) A engages in unwanted conduct related to a relevant protected characteristic, and
(b) the conduct has the purpose or effect of—
(i) violating B's dignity, or
(ii) creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for B…

(4) In deciding whether conduct has the effect referred to in subsection (1)(b), each of the following must be taken into account—

(a) the perception of B;
(b) the other circumstances of the case;
(c) whether it is reasonable for the conduct to have that effect.

(5) The relevant protected characteristics are— … disability;

….”

59. We will refer to that henceforth as the proscribed environment. There are three factors to take into account:

59.1 The perception of the Claimant;
59.2 The other circumstances of the case, and
59.3 Whether it is reasonable for the conduct to have that effect.

60. The conduct complained of that is said to give rise to the proscribed environment must be related to the protected characteristic. That means the Tribunal must look at the context in which the conduct occurred. It also means that general bullying and harassment, in the colloquial sense, is not protected by the Equality Act; protection from such behaviour only arises if it is related in some way to the protected characteristic. See Warby v Wunda Group Plc UKEAT/0434/11/CEA Case Number: 3307564/2023.

61. HHJ Richardson observed in Hartley v Foreign and Commonwealth Office Services UKEAT/0033/15/LA at paragraph 23: “The question posed by section 26(1) is whether A's conduct related to the protected characteristic. This is a broad test, requiring an evaluation by the Employment Tribunal of the evidence in the round — recognising, of course, that witnesses will not readily volunteer that a remark was related to a protected characteristic. In some cases the burden of proof provisions may be important, though they have not played any part in submissions on this appeal. The Equality Code says (paragraph 7.9): ‘7.9. Unwanted conduct ‘related to’ a protected characteristic has a broad meaning in that the conduct does not have to be because of the protected characteristic.’ …”

62. The motivation and thought processes of those accused of harassment may be relevant to the question of whether their conduct amounted to harassment, see Unite the Union v Nailard [2018] IRLR 730 at paragraphs 108 -109.

63. The EAT gave some helpful guidance in the case of Richmond Pharmacology v Dhaliwal [2009] IRLR 336. It is a case relating to race discrimination, but the comments, (by Underhill P, as he then was) apply to cases of harassment in respect of any of the proscribed grounds. “We accept that not every racially slanted adverse comment or conduct may constitute the violation of a person’s dignity. Dignity is not necessarily violated by things said or done which are trivial or transitory, particularly if it should have been clear that any offence was unintended. Whilst it is very important that employers, and tribunals, are sensitive to the hurt that can be caused by racially offensive comments or conduct (or indeed comments or conduct on other grounds covered by the cognate legislation to which we have referred). It is also important not to encourage a culture of hypersensitivity or the imposition of legal liability in respect of every unfortunate phrase.”

64. Those sentiments were reinforced by Sir Patrick Elias in Grant v Her Majesty’s Land Registry [2011] EWCA Civ 769. Of the words, “intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive” he said that Employment Tribunals, “should not cheapen” the significance of those words, they are an important control to prevent trivial acts causing minor upsets being caught up in the concept of harassment.

65. In Pemberton v Inwood [2018] EWCA Civ 564 Underhill LJ said at paragraph 88: “ In order to decide whether any conduct falling within sub-paragraph

(1) (a) has either of the proscribed effects under sub-paragraph (1) (b), a tribunal must consider both (by reason of sub-section (4) (a)) Case Number: 3307564/2023. whether the putative victim perceives themselves to have suffered the effect in question (the subjective question) and (by reason of sub- section (4) (c)) whether it was reasonable for the conduct to be regarded as having that effect (the objective question). It must also, of course, take into account all the other circumstances – sub-section (4) (b). The relevance of the subjective question is that if the claimant does not perceive their dignity to have been violated, or an adverse environment created, then the conduct should not be found to have had that effect. The relevance of the objective question is that if it was not reasonable for the conduct to be regarded as violating the claimant's dignity or creating an adverse environment for him or her,

then it should not be found to have done so.”

66. In terms of the burden of proof and section 136, the Claimant will need to show that on the balance of probabilities, he had been subjected to unwanted conduct which created the proscribed environment for him. Alternatively, that there was some evidence from which the tribunal could properly conclude that the unwanted conduct had the purpose of creating the proscribed environment, in which case the burden shifts to the employer to show that it did not. Unless it is obvious that the conduct is related to the protected characteristic, the Claimant will need to produce some evidence that the conduct is so related from which, absent explanation, the tribunal could properly conclude that it was, thus shifting the burden of proof to the employer to show that it was not.

Time

67. Section 123 of the Equality Act requires that claims of discrimination must normally be made within 3 months of the act complained of, or such further period as the Tribunal considers just and equitable. Where an act continues over a period of time, time runs from the end of that period, from the last act.

68. In the case of Hendricks v Metropolitan Police Commissioners [2003] IRLR 96 the Court of Appeal on the question of what amounted to a continuing act, cautioned Tribunals against looking too literally for a policy, rule, practice, scheme or regime, but rather to look for incidents which are linked to each other and which are evidence of a “continuing discriminatory state of affairs”. As Mummery LJ put it at paragraph 52 of that Judgment: “The question is whether that is an act extending over a period as distinct from a succession of unconnected or isolated or specific acts, for which time would begin to run from the date when each specific act was committed”.

69. A failure to make a reasonable adjustment is not an act, or a continuing act, but a failure to act, an omission. In the case of Kingston Upon Hull City Council v Matuszowicz [2009] ICR 1170 it was explained that in the context of reasonable adjustments, time runs from either when the omission was decided upon, or if there is no evidence of a deliberate Case Number: 3307564/2023. decision, when the decision to make the adjustment might reasonably have been expected to have been made. This can lead to a situation where time expires long before a Claimant may have realised, in which case a Tribunal is likely to be willing to find that it is just and equitable to extend time.

Findings of Fact

70. There are few, if any, conflicts of evidence. The Tribunal’s primary task at the fact finding stage of this case, has been to identify the relevant facts set out in the witness statements and documents necessary to determine the issues, rather than resolving conflicts of evidence.

71. Unless stated otherwise, reference to page numbers is reference to the page of the document in the main bundle

72. The Norfolk and Suffolk Constabularies collaborate in the sharing of resources, including Human Resources, which is why in some of the policies quoted below, one will find references to, “Constabularies” plural.

73. The Sickness Absence Management Policy is at page 1753 published March 2020 and reviewed in March 2023.

74. The following are quotations from relevant passages within this policy:

“12. Absence Trigger Points – Informal Attendance Support

12.1 Line managers should seek to take early action where any sickness absence concerns exist. For a fair and consistent approach the Constabularies have set “triggers” at which managers should consider the level of absence and take appropriate supportive action. It is important managers take account of individual circumstances.
12.2 The triggers are:  3 periods of sickness absence within a rolling 6 calendar month period.  4 periods of sickness absence within a rolling 12 calendar month period.  Cumulative absence totalling 28 days … absent within a rolling 12 calendar month period. …  A single period of absence that lasts, or is expected to last, 28 calendar days or longer. Case Number: 3307564/2023.  Any other absences that gives cause for concern – subject a significant pattern of absence occurring. …
14.4 For disability related absence, whilst this will not be discounted for monitoring purposes, consideration may be given to making adjustment to absence triggers and in relation to any formal management action. It may be necessary to also consider further reasonable adjustments. Exactly what adjustments are appropriate will depend on the nature of the disability or condition and its impact on the individual’s attendance at work. These should be agreed by the individual and line manager and documented in a Tailored Adjustment Agreement. Appendix B – Recuperative Duties and Phased Return … What are they and when are they used? Recuperative duties are when a staff member is unable to undertake the full duties of their role for a short period of time whilst recovering from ill health or injury but is able to perform some work. A phased return is when a staff member returns and works shorter hours or a different pattern (e.g. days only) gradually increasing back to their normal full hours. Placing a staff member on recuperative duties or a phased return will only be considered if their Fit Note suggests that they would benefit from this and / or it is recommended by Workplace Health Department. … Consideration of recuperative duties or a phased return should be treated on a case by case basis. The Constabulary does have a legal responsibility to consider all possible reasonable adjustments for those whose requirement is disability related, but in all circumstances we still want to be as supportive as we can so all requests and recommendations should be accommodated where possible. If it is not possible to accommodate the staff member on recuperative duties recommended by their GP the individual may have to remain off sick until they are fit to return to their full role. How long is it for? An individual should not be on recuperative duties or phased return for more than 12 weeks, unless there are exceptional circumstances, in which case the HR operations manager has the discretion to extend Case Number: 3307564/2023. the period. All cases should be reviewed on a regular basis, which will include holding ASMs and referral back to Workplace Health as appropriate. Following the 12 week period if an individual is not capable of returning to full duties at this point they will be referred to Workplace Health to help inform options and next steps. … How will pay be affected? When a staff member is on recuperative duties or a phased return they will receive full pay based on their normal hours, including any allowances they normally receive for up to 12 weeks (unless extended further).”

75. The Capability Policy is at page 1770. This was published in March 2021 and reviewed in March 2023. Relevant quotations from this Policy are as follows:

“2. Purpose of this Policy

2.1 This policy provides the formal procedure for dealing with cases of performance or attendance concerns where supportive measures and informal management action have failed to result in the individual achieving or maintaining satisfactory standards. It aims to ensure that assistance to improve is provided in a structured, consistent, and supportive manner. …

8. Formal Capability Procedure

8.1 The formal capability procedure comprises 3 stages as set out below:
8.2 Stage 1 – where informal management action has not brought about the required improvement in the individual’s performance and / or attendance, the next step is a First Formal Capability Meeting. This marks the start of Stage 1 of the formal procedure, and will occur when management, with the advice of HR, agree that formal action is the appropriate next step.
8.3 Stage 2 – where the individual’s performance and / or attendance has not improved to an acceptable standard within the agreed timescales of the improvement plan, or relapses within the duration of the written warning, where issued as the Stage 1 outcome, the matter may be progressed to Stage 2. The individual will then be requested to attend a Second Formal Capability Case Number: 3307564/2023. Meeting. Stage 2 will not be progressed unless Stage 1 has taken place.
8.4 Stage 3 – where the individual’s performance and / or attendance has not improved to an acceptable standard within the agreed time scales of the final improvement plan or the individual has relapsed within the duration of the final written warning where issued as a Stage 2 outcome, they may be progressed to Stage 3. The individual will then be requested to attend a Final Capability Hearing.
8.5 Progression to subsequent stages of the formal procedure must be for matters similar to, or connected with, the unsatisfactory performance / attendance referred to in improvement plans issued at the earliest stages. …

9. Right to be Accompanied

9.1 Individuals have the right to be accompanied to any capability meeting or hearing, including appeals. Individuals can also request to be accompanied at any informal stage of performance or attendance management and no request will be unreasonably refused. The companion can be either a workplace colleague or UNISON representative (or a representative of any other alternative Union at formal stage).
12.4 At the Hearing: – The reasons why the individual’s performance / attendance is unsatisfactory will be explained. – The individual, and / or their companion, will have the opportunity to respond giving any further information or explanation, and ask questions. …

17. Meeting Postponements and Adjournments

17.1 Capability meetings and hearings will be held without any unreasonable delay in order to ensure that evidence is current and recollection fresh.
17.2 If the individual or their companion is unable to attend on the dates / time specified a short delay will be acceptable to reschedule to an alternative date convenient to them. If they are subsequently unable to Case Number: 3307564/2023. attend on the rescheduled date, and all allowances have been made, the meeting or hearing may proceed in their absence in order to avoid further delay, and consequently a decision will be made in their absence. In these circumstances if the individual cannot attend they will be given the opportunity to submit their written evidence. …

20. Reasonable Adjustments

20.1 In all cases of unsatisfactory performance or attendance involving ill health, especially those involved with disability, consideration must be given to making any reasonable adjustments.
20.2 Guidance on reasonable adjustments can be provided by the member of HR advising on the case.”

76. The Disability Management Policy is at page 305, it is dated July 2019 and reviewed in July 2022. The relevant quotations are as follows: “1.4 We recognise that some workplace practices or physical aspects of a working environment can be challenging for people with disabilities. We are committed to identifying any such challenges that could place a person with disabilities at a disadvantage, then taking all reasonable steps to remove steps to overcome them. The focus must remain on what each individual can do, rather than what they cannot. …

2.2 The constabularies are committed to moving beyond compliance and adopting best practice. Managers are therefore encouraged to avoid spending time assessing whether someone has a disability and instead, be proactive in obtaining advice around assessing what barriers they may be facing and being flexible in making adjustments to remove or reduce those barriers. …
6.1 The Equality Act 2010 requires employers to make reasonable adjustments when an individual is placed at a substantial disadvantage as a result of a disability. This means, wherever possible, removing barriers that might get in the way of a person with a disability effectively doing his or her job, or providing the employee with a role that he or she is otherwise capable of doing.
6.2 Decisions about adjustments must take into account: Case Number: 3307564/2023.  How effective the change will be in avoiding the disadvantage the disabled person would otherwise experience.  Practicality.  Cost.  The organisation’s resources and size.  The availability of financial support (considering Access to Work).

7. Disability Related Sickness Absence …

7.3 An adjustment to the attendance standard may be an appropriate reasonable adjustment depending on the particular circumstances of an individual case. Advice should be sought from Human Resources and / or Workplace Health.

8. Disability Arising During Employment

8.1 We are committed to ensuring that individuals who develop a disability during their employment remain employed, where possible in their existing role.”

77. Mr Gallop’s employment with the Respondent began on 20 April 2015 as a Victim and Witness Support Officer. Latterly, he had been employed as an Investigator on the Domestic Abuse Safeguarding Team, (DAST).

78. The Respondent is the Chief Constable for the Police Force of Norfolk.

79. Mr Gallop had a poor attendance record. It is accurately summarised in a table produced by Mr Hobbs in his closing submissions at paragraph 40 as follows: Year Calendar days Proportion of the calendar sickness absence year off sick (Jan to Dec) 2015 (8.5 months) 39 15%

2016 61 17%

2017 97 27%

2018 104 28%

2019 133 36%

Case Number: 3307564/2023.

2020 218 60%

2021 172 47%

2022 265 72% 2023 (9 months) 273 100%

80. The relevant period for this case is from October 2021 to the end of Mr Gallop’s employment on 27 September 2023. However, it is important to acknowledge by way of background that in respect of Mr Gallop’s absence prior to October 2021, some of those absences are recorded as having been for, “psychological disorders – nerves – depression – anxiety” and some are for other reasons.

81. In June 2017, Mr Gallop attended a Stage 1 First Formal Capability Attendance meeting and was issued with a formal warning for poor attendance.

82. In March 2018, Mr Gallop attended a Stage 2 Second Formal Capability Attendance meeting where he was issued with a further formal warning of 18 months duration.

83. In February 2020, the Force Medical Advisor, (FMA) recommended redeployment. The background, (the report is at page 790) is a combination of issues in the workplace which Mr Gallop described as a hostile working environment and his depression, which he was finding debilitating.

84. Medical redeployment was granted and due to take place in April 2020, but the disruption caused by the Covid epidemic meant that it was unable to go ahead at that time. He was to join the DAST team.

85. Mr Gallop was in fact absent with depression and anxiety between 6 February and 28 July 2020. He returned to work on 3 August 2020. He commenced full time employment in his new role, (on a higher pay band) on 4 November 2020.

86. The DAST team consisted of six people. Incidents of domestic violence were referred to the team, who would investigate, not the crime but the background. They would look to see what support could be provided to the victim, they would look into the history of the incident and of the alleged perpetrator. They would consider whether it would be appropriate to disclose the history of the perpetrator to the alleged victim. At times, they would be required to provide the perpetrator’s history to the Officers attending the incident. They would consider safeguarding issues in relation to the victim, liaising with and signposting to other agencies. They would encourage decision making by the victim. They would produce a risk assessment. Sometimes they would provide a mobile phone to the Case Number: 3307564/2023. victim. It was a fast moving environment, which involved reacting to telephone calls and emails, calling for a timed response. Mr Gallop in cross examination, agreed that typically they would have five to ten high risk cases each in their workload and that they would work with a victim for three to six weeks. Mr Gallop agreed that sometimes there would be dozens or even hundreds of cases waiting for review. He also said that he represented 5% of the team’s resource and that there was routine, less demanding, less urgent work to be done. He agreed that in his absence at any time, the referrals all had to be covered by his colleagues and they have to work harder.

87. Mr Gallop was absent from work due to depression for 109 days between July and October 2021.

88. On 20 September 2021, Mr Gallop told his manager Miss Wright, (a Police Sergeant) that his doctor was looking at the possibility that he may have ME / CFS. Miss Wright was sympathetic, as she also had ME.

89. Mr Gallop attended an Attendance Support Meeting with Miss Wright on 14 October 2021. It is recorded that he mentioned that he may be suffering from Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) and that a Workplace Health appointment had been made for 20 October 2021. Miss Wright therefore decided to await the outcome of that before meeting with Mr Gallop again in October.

90. On 20 October 2021, Mr Gallop met with the Force Medical Advisor, who produced a report which is at page 795. The FMA confirmed that Mr Gallop has chronic depression and was starting an assessment by Chronic Fatigue specialists. He recommended that when Mr Gallop is ready, he commence a phased return to work, following any advice for that given by the Chronic Fatigue specialists. He warns that the employer should be prepared for a likely very gradual evolution and recovery over a prolonged period with a slow phased return to work. There was a delay in the report reaching the Respondent. Mr Gallop did not initially give his consent to the report being released; there was a misunderstanding. He rectified the situation on 3 January 2022, (page 510A). The Respondent says they did not see the Report until 5 August 2022. They refer to chasing it a number of times and say that the delay was down to Mr Gallop not providing consent. As we have seen from page 510A, that is not correct. Nor are we convinced that the Respondent did not see it until August 2022. They chased for the report on 20 January 2022, (page 535). In support of their contention, the Respondent referred us to another chasing email of 23 March 2022, (at page 557B) but that is chasing a report following a consultation on 21 February 2022, not October 2021. If they had not by then had the October 2021 report, one would have thought they would have been chasing that too. Similarly, the Respondent refers to an email of 31 May 2022 as evidence of its chasing the October 2021 report, but we see from that email, (at page 582) Miss Wright states that she is chasing the “latest report”. It is not October’s report. We think that probably, the Respondent had the October 2021 report before August 2022, (we cannot Case Number: 3307564/2023. say for certain when, but it seems likely to have been before the chasing email of 23 March 2022 referred to above). Certainly, Mr Gallop is not to blame for any delay in their receiving the report, beyond 3 January 2022.

91. On 1 November 2021, Mr Gallop attempted a phased return to work. Miss Wright had agreed with him that he would come in and work a minimum of two hours per day. He managed two days, but on 3 November he telephoned to say that he would be arriving at work a bit later because the previous two days had taken their toll. Miss Wright seeks some guidance from Mrs Johnson of HR, enquiring whether two hours was the minimum, (page 508). Mrs Johnson replied, (page 507), “I would suggest that if David is unable to do a minimum of two hours a day and build that up an hour each week, then he is unfit for work.”

92. On 3 November 2021, Mr Gallop began another period of absence which lasted 59 days, until 31 December 2021.

93. Miss Wright decided not to proceed to Stage 1 and held a further Absence Support Meeting with Mr Gallop on 22 December 2021, (page 520). Mr Gallop requested that he be allowed to work from home on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. Miss Wright told him that was not possible due to lack of laptops and as he had been off work since July, she would prefer that he came into the office, because she believed that would be, “more beneficial mentally”. She noted that they were waiting for the report following a Workplace Health appointment on 20 October and proposed a further meeting on 11 January 2022, as Mr Gallop was planning to return to work on 4 January 2022.

94. On 23 December 2021, Mrs Johnson of HR wrote with some advice to Miss Wright stating that it would be normal to start a recuperative program on four hours a day. Given the current lack of medical information, she suggested that they start Mr Gallop on three hours a day, increasing to four hours during the second week. She advised that Mr Gallop would need to show that he was able to increase his hours and return to full hours within 12 weeks. If he were to struggle, she observed that he has a bank of annual leave to use that would give him some flexibility.

95. Mr Gallop returned to work as planned on 4 January 2022, working three hours a day for the first week. He was late into work on his second day and Miss Wright permitted him to start at 1pm. She sought advice from Mrs Johnson, indicating that she would like to be able to continue to expect Mr Gallop to start at 10am. She expressed concern that if he started at 1pm as a routine, it would be difficult for him thereafter to increase his hours. Mrs Johnson’s advice was, (page 527) that in the absence of any medical guidance, it was not unreasonable to ask Mr Gallop to start at 10am. She expressed the view that Mr Gallop needed to be at work, where there are supervisors and colleagues present to support him. Case Number: 3307564/2023.

96. On 7 January 2022, Mr Gallop commenced a further period of absence due to fatigue. The decision was then made to move to a formal capability process.

97. On 20 January 2022, Mrs Johnson wrote to Workplace Health asking some questions in anticipation of an appointment Mr Gallop had with them on 28 January 2022, (page 535). She asked for a short term and a long term prognosis on his return to work, whether there were reasonable adjustments that they should consider to assist his returning to work and to maintain attendance. She also asked whether advice could be given for a suitable recuperative duties plan to support his return to work. In her email, she made the observation that they had not yet received the report from the appointment on 20 October 2021. She wrote that she understood they were waiting for Mr Gallop’s consent, (as we have seen, he had in fact provided his consent on 3 January, page 510a) and she asked that Workplace Health ensure they obtain his consent promptly in respect of the forthcoming appointment.

98. Mr Gallop was invited on 28 January 2022 to attend a First Formal Capability (Attendance) Meeting on 23 February 2022.

99. In the meantime, on 28 January 2022, Mr Gallop missed his appointment with Workplace Health. The appointment was to be by telephone, he missed the call and forgot about the appointment. The appointment was subsequently rearranged and took place on 21 February 2022, resulting in a report dated 31 March 2022, (page 797, see below).

100. On 2 February 2022, Mr Gallop and Miss Wright spoke on the telephone, (page 1801). He protested that he did not consider it appropriate that he should have been moved to Stage 1 of the Capability Management process whilst he was still not at work. Miss Wright asked if there was anything they could do to help him and he said not.

101. The Stage 1 Capability Meeting was scheduled to take place on 23 February 2022, to be heard by Mr Gray, (Detective Inspector). Mr Gallop emailed on 8 February 2022, (page 1803) to say that he had an appointment with the CFS / ME Clinic on 4 March 2022 and requested that the Stage 1 meeting be postponed until after that. Mrs Johnson advised

Mr Gray against agreeing to the postponement:

“The Stage 1 meeting is to consider if David’s attendance to date is satisfactory or not. If it is considered satisfactory then there will be no further formal action. If David’s attendance is considered unsatisfactory then he will be issued with an improvement plan and first written warning. Regardless of the outcome we would still consider any new medical advice received following the Stage 1 meeting to continue to support David during his absence and on his return to work.”

102. Mr Gray refused the postponement request. Case Number: 3307564/2023.

103. The Stage 1 Formal Capability (Attendance) Meeting took place on 23 February 2022, (page 1816). The outcome was that Mr Gallop was issued with a First Formal Warning of 12 months duration. The warning is dated 3 March 2022, (page 1836) in respect of we note the following:

103.1 Mr Gallop’s absence had been over a significant period of time on many occasions and attempts at a return to work had been unsuccessful;
103.2 At that point there was no prospect of a return to work;
103.3 Mr Gray wrote, “Your lack of acknowledgement of the support Workplace Health gives to the employee but also to the organisation in having the medical information available to support the employee. This is coupled with you not taking personal responsibility to contact Workplace Health to rearrange the appointment”; and
103.4 Mr Gallop’s absence was having a significant impact on his team and an increased demand on his colleagues.

104. The criticism in relation to Workplace Health seems harsh. The appointment had been rearranged.

105. The Improvement Plan is at page 1831. Mr Gallop was expected to return to work on 3 April 2022 when his latest Fit Note expired. He is set the standard unamended sickness absence targets in accordance with the Respondent’s policies noted above. He is directed to take personal responsibility regarding his own health and wellbeing. He is required to inform management of any reasonable adjustments that may be required. He is warned that if his attendance does not improve, he will progress to the next formal stage of the Capability Policy.

106. Mr Gallop remained absent until 20 April 2022.

107. We note and accept Miss Wright’s evidence at paragraph 23 of her witness statement that at this stage, Mr Gallop’s absence was increasing the workload on other members of the DAST, which was adversely affecting service delivery.

108. Mr Gallop received formal diagnosis of ME / CFS on 4 March 2022. The report from the NHS specialist service for ME / CFS, (page 547) referred to Mr Gallop’s activity range of 50% on a good day and 20% on a bad day. He was described as probably depressed. The cause is thought to have been that Mr Gallop suffered Glandular Fever many years previously and then more recently, a viral infection in the summer of 2021, which would have triggered the condition. He was told that the Occupational Therapy Department will support him and he was advised that if he gets better and decides to return to work, he should have a phased return to work with possibly one or two days off during the week. Case Number: 3307564/2023.

109. Mr Gallop confirmed the diagnosis to Mrs Johnson in an email of 8 March and passed on the advice that any return to work should be cautious and likely starting with working every other day. He indicated that he understood that the advice from the OT would be available to the Respondent.

110. On 25 March 2022, Miss Wright sent to Mr Gallop a proposed Return to Work Plan, (page 559) with two options, in anticipation of his returning to work on 1 April 2022, as planned. Both entailed starting with alternate days off, four hours a day under Option 1 and 5 hours a day under Option 2, gradually building to full time over 12 weeks. Mr Gallop replied, (page

558) that the proposed return to work was unrealistic. He conveyed he had been spoken to by the ME / CFS clinic doctor, who had suggested that any initial return to work should be a couple of hours every other day and increased very slowly, at least initially. He said that it is unfortunate that the letter to the GP, (referred to above) only specified a day or two off each week. He explained that the OT Clinic had told him that he would likely have to wait for months for an appointment and that he had made an appointment with his GP to discuss her opinion of his return to work.

111. We note Mrs Johnson chased the Force Medical Advisor and Workplace Health, for a report, (pages 557a and 577b). The report being chased is that in respect of the meeting with Mr Gallop on 21 February 2022.

112. The report from the 21 February consultation with Workplace Health is dated 31 March 2022, (page 797). The doctor reported that Mr Gallop was due to have an initial consultation with the Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Service Specialists at the beginning of March. He had been diagnosed by his GP with Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Fibromyalgia. He said the short term prognosis for a return to work was not good. He said that the long term prognosis was very uncertain, commenting, “Generally speaking past sickness absence record is the best guidance to likely future sickness absence record barring any new

medical issues.”

He went on to say that in this case, there were potential new medical issues, that of CFS and Fibromyalgia against the background of other underlying diagnosis set out in previous reports, (i.e. anxiety and depression) which he said, “May turn out to be the true determinants of working patterns / sickness absence patterns overall in the long term.” He wrote that in discussion with Mr Gallop, they had been unable to identify much to recommend by way of adjustments that could assist. He recommended that the Respondent await advice from the CFS Specialist Clinic Occupational Therapist, which he said would be the best guidance, warning again that the return to work program was likely to be prolonged and slow. Case Number: 3307564/2023.

113. On 23 March 2022, Miss Wright sought some advice from Mrs Johnson, (page 557) noting that Mr Gallop’s Fit Note was to expire on 31 March and indicating she was thinking of asking him to do four hour shifts from 10am to 1 o’clock.

114. Mrs Johnson gave her advice in an email of 31 March, (page 565/6) stating that if Mr Gallop was not able to return to work four hours a day every other day, which is an adjustment to what they would usually seek in a Return to Work Plan, then he is not fit to work at all. She advised that if Mr Gallop does not return to work, Miss Wright should consider moving to Stage 2. She advised Miss Wright that she may to move straight to Stage 2, or she can wait for further medical advice, as that might indicate a return to work date. She noted that the latest WPH report recommended waiting for the Specialist Clinic’s advice with regard to a recuperative plan and so she suggests Miss Wright wait and see what the GP’s advice is.

115. Later in the day on 31 March, Mr Gallop sent Miss Wright his GP’s Fit Note which is at page 562. This is an important document. It states that Mr Gallop may be fit to return to work on a phased return to work on altered hours, suggesting that he should aim to return to work on 18 April 2022 with a phased return of two to three months, initially two hours a day, alternate days. In his covering email, (page 561) Mr Gallop confirmed he had received that day an appointment at the ME Clinic for 13 July with the Occupational Therapist.

116. In an email of 6 April 2022, Mrs Johnson reiterated her advice to Miss Wright that if Mr Gallop was unable to return to work at least for half his hours per week, he is not fit to return to work. That was not the advice of the GP.

117. On 13 April 2022, Miss Wright and Mr Gallop discussed his return to work on the telephone. Miss Wright records this telephone conversation in an email that day to Mrs Johnson and Mr Gray, (page 564/5). She reported that Mr Gallop was not happy at the prospect of being moved to Stage 2, which he perceived as being provocative. Mr Gallop had expressed the view that the Respondent was ignoring medical evidence and was setting him up to fail. He said the medical advice was two hours every other day, for a couple of weeks. He said his doctor’s advice had been to build up slowly, that if he was to work four hours a day, including travelling time, that would take him over double what is recommended. Mr Gallop said he could probably come in for four hours a day but he would not be very productive. Miss Wright said that would impact on the team, which Mr Gallop appreciated. Miss Wright tells Mrs Johnson and Mr Kyle that she is thinking of trying two hours every other day for a two week period, before moving to Stage 2, as advised by the GP on the latest sick note, with a phased return over two to three months. A sensible proposal.

118. Miss Wright tells us in her witness statement, (paragraph 35) that Mrs Johnson and Mr Gray reiterated to her that if Mr Gallop was not able to work four hours a day on alternate days, he was not fit for work. Case Number: 3307564/2023.

119. On 19 April 2022, Mr Gallop wrote an email to Miss Wright, copied to Mrs Johnson and Mr Gray. The email opens, “Dear all” and so is apparently addressed to all three of them. He says that the FMA’s advice is being ignored and he is being set up to fail. He complains there was no need to inform him that they had decided to move to Stage 2 whilst he was still off sick, which only heaps further stress upon him. He suggests that movement to Stage 2 is cynically opportunistic and not supportive. He wrote that he was struggling, “not to use the term bullied”. He writes, “I have attempted to return to work twice before, prior to the diagnosis confirmation and both have failed. I have not seen the evidence of why the organisation believes that it is facilitating a successful return to work given the circumstances.”

120. He never received a reply to this email. The lack of a reply is Issue 7(f). Miss Wright’s explanation is that she was not at work on that day, Mr Gallop in fact returned to work on 20 April and she said she did not think it was necessary to respond as they had already discussed the issues on 13 April. There was no explanation as to why Mrs Johnson or Mr Gray did not reply.

121. On 20 April 2022, Mr Gallop returned to work. He was on a plan of recuperative duties, scheduled to work four hours a day on alternate days, gradually increasing to being back full time over 12 weeks. He was on full pay. In the period between 20 April and 13 May 2022, he worked a total of 8 days of four hour shifts. He was absent due to sickness on 27 April and 9 – 12 May. He began a further period of absence due to chronic fatigue on 15 May, which lasted until 5 June 2022.

122. An Absence Support Meeting with Miss Wright and Mrs Johnson took place on 1 June 2022. The Recuperative Plan’s 12 weeks was reset and it was confirmed he could apply for it to be extended again, or he could be paid for the hours that he was able to work. Mr Gallop confirmed he was willing to accept reduced pay. He suggested working from home, but Mrs Johnson said that would have to be via an ongoing review of home working called “Modern Workforce Program” in respect of which he could expect an interview in due course.

123. Also on 1 June 2022, the FMA provided a further report, (page 799) following a telephone interview with Mr Gallop on 25 May 2022. He explained that Mr Gallop had confirmed he had received the diagnosis from the Chronic Fatigue Service that he had Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and that he was now awaiting an appointment with OT in July, which should make recommendations about activity levels and Return to Work Programs. He said that the overall Occupational Health advice is the same as in the previous report, i.e. that of 21 February 2022.

124. Mr Gallop returned to work on 8 June 2022 and met with Miss Wright for a Recuperative Plan meeting on 13 June 2022, notes of which are at page

592. The notes record the GP’s advice of a phased return to work over Case Number: 3307564/2023. two to three months, initially two hours alternate days. Miss Wright wrote in her note that this was considered alongside the Workplace Health advice from Dr Roberts. She noted that the advice was in respect of recuperative duties and to wait for advice from the CFS Specialist OT. The Recuperative Plan put in place is for Mr Gallop to work four hours a day on alternate days for the first three weeks, five hours a day alternate days on the fourth week, six hours a day on alternate days for the fifth week, then over the following six weeks, working every day with the hours gradually increasing from 18 hours a week to 35 hours a week. He is expected to return to full hours by the week commencing 22 August 2022, although it is expressly stated this could be extended by somebody senior in HR called Ms Murphy.

125. Mr Gallop commenced a further period of absence due to chronic fatigue and depression on 27 June 2022, (page 603).

126. We note and accept at this stage, the evidence of Miss Wright at paragraph 44 of her witness statement, that Mr Gallop’s absence was continuing to adversely affect service delivery, by increasing workload on other members of the team.

127. A Stage 2 formal meeting was arranged for 21 July 2022.