RESERVED JUDGMENT

1. The Claim for Unfair Dismissal, against the Second Respondent contrary to s.94 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 (“ERA”), succeeds.

2. The Claim for Wrongful Dismissal against the Second Respondent succeeds.

3. The Claim for Unauthorised Deductions from Wages, in relation to unpaid wages, contrary to s.13 of the ERA 1996, against the Second Respondent succeeds.

4. The Claim for Direct Race Discrimination on the grounds of race, contrary to s.13 of the Equality Act 2010 (“EqA”) against the Second Respondent, succeeds.

5. The Claim for a Failure to Provide a Statement of Particulars, contrary to s. 38 of the ERA 1996, against the Second Respondent succeeds. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

6. The Claim for Indirect Race Discrimination contrary to s.19 EqA 2010, against the First and Second Respondent fails.

7. All remaining claims against the First Respondent are dismissed.

REASONS

Introduction

8. This matter, in terms of what took place at the Preliminary Hearing on the 21 April 2023, and at the First and Second adjourned Final Hearing, has a most complicated procedural history which will be summarised below.

The Claims

9. By way of an ET1 claim filed on the 18 August 2022 the Claimant brought claims for Unfair Dismissal, Wrongful Dismissal, Unauthorised Deductions from Wages, Indirect Race Discrimination, and a Failure to Provide a Statement of Particulars of Employment. At the date of her dismissal, she was employed by the Second Respondent.

10. On the 29 September 2022 the First and Second Respondent filed their ET3 form denying all claims.

The Case Management Hearing on the 21 April 2023

11. A preliminary hearing for case management took place by CVP on the 1 April 2023. The Case Management Order of Employment Judge Brady (“the Brady CMO”), arising from a Case Management Hearing which took place on 21 April 2023, summarised the issues in dispute in this case.

12. The Brady CMO set out the following claims and issues’ although some paragraphs were identified (as underlined below) in the Brady CMO as not being in dispute. In addition, this Tribunal also dealt with and allowed the addition of a claim, at the outset of the hearing, for Direct Race Discrimination, and that is set out and underlined at paragraph 6.2 below. The detail of this additional claim being added is dealt with in detail later in this Judgement. Brady List of Issues with additional claim of Direct Race Discrimination added by this Tribunal: -

The Complaints

44. The claimant is making the following complaints: Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

44.0 Unfair dismissal
44.1 Indirect Race Discrimination
44.2 Unlawful Deduction of Wages
44.3 Notice Pay
44.4 The Claimant also states that she has not received Terms and Conditions of Employment and claims under section 38 of the Employment Act 2002. The Issues

45. The issues the Tribunal will decide are set out below.

1. Employment status

1.1 Was the Claimant an employee of the Respondents within the meaning of section 230 of the Employment Rights Act 1996? The Respondent does not dispute this.
1.2 Was the Claimant an employee of the Respondents within the meaning of section 83 of the Equality Act 2010? The Respondent does not dispute this.
1.3 Were the Respondents associated employers under section 218(6) of the ERA 1996. (The Respondents accepts that the Claimant was employed by Respondents 2 when her employment ended)

2. Time limits

2.1 Given the date the claim form was presented and the dates of early conciliation, any complaint may not have been brought in time. The Respondents accepts that the claim form was presented within time of the Claimant leaving the 2nd Respondents employment.
2.2 Was the discrimination complaint made within the time limit in section 123 of the Equality Act 2010? The Tribunal will decide:
2.2.1 Was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the act to which the complaint relates?
2.2.2 If not, was there conduct extending over a period?
2.2.3 If so, was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the end of that period?
2.2.4 If not, were the claims made within a further period that the Tribunal thinks is just and equitable? The Tribunal will decide: Case Number: - 3310860/2022.
2.2.4.1 Why were the complaints not made to the Tribunal in time?
2.2.4.2 In any event, is it just and equitable in all the circumstances to extend time?

2.3 Was the unfair dismissal / unauthorised deductions / Notice Pay complaint made within the time limit in section 111 / 48 / 23 of the Employment Rights Act 1996? The Tribunal will decide:
2.3.1 Was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the effective date of termination / act complained of / date of payment of the wages from which the deduction was made etc? The Respondents accepts that the claim form was presented within time of the Claimant leaving the 2nd Respondents employment.
2.3.2 unauthorised deductions If not, was there a series of deductions and was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the last one?
2.3.3 If not, was it reasonably practicable for the claim to be made to the Tribunal within the time limit?
2.3.4 If it was not reasonably practicable for the claim to be made to the Tribunal within the time limit, was it made within a reasonable period?

3. Unfair dismissal

3.1 Was the Claimant dismissed? Respondents says the Claimant was not dismissed but handed in her notice. Respondents will apply to amend the Grounds of Resistance to reflect this. Claimant says Respondents told her to hand in her notice and in any event after she had done so, she then received an email saying that she was dismissed.
3.2 What was the reason or principal reason for dismissal? The Respondents says the reason was conduct in that the mutual trust and confidence had broken down by the Claimant seeking employment elsewhere. The Tribunal will need to decide whether the Respondents genuinely believed the Claimant had committed misconduct.
3.3 If the reason was misconduct, did the Respondents act reasonably in all the circumstances in treating that as a sufficient Case Number: - 3310860/2022. reason to dismiss the Claimant? The Tribunal will usually decide, in particular, whether:
3.3.1 there were reasonable grounds for that belief;
3.3.2 at the time the belief was formed the Respondents had carried out a reasonable investigation;
3.3.3 the Respondents otherwise acted in a procedurally fair manner;
3.3.4 dismissal was within the range of reasonable responses.
3.4 What was the reason or principal reason for dismissal? The Respondents says the reason was a substantial reason capable of justifying dismissal, namely the Respondents says the reason was conduct in that the mutual trust and confidence had broken down by the Claimant seeking employment elsewhere.
3.5 Did the Respondents act reasonably in all the circumstances in treating that as a sufficient reason to dismiss the Claimant?

4. Remedy for unfair dismissal

4.1 The Claimant does not seek reinstatement.
4.2 If there is a compensatory award, how much should it be? The Tribunal will decide:
4.2.1 What financial losses has the dismissal caused the Claimant?
4.2.2 Has the Claimant taken reasonable steps to replace their lost earnings, for example by looking for another job?
4.2.3 If not, for what period of loss should the Claimant be compensated?
4.2.4 Is there a chance that the Claimant would have been fairly dismissed anyway if a fair procedure had been followed, or for some other reason?
4.2.5 If so, should the Claimant’s compensation be reduced? By how much?
4.2.6 Did the ACAS Code of Practice on Disciplinary and Grievance Procedures apply? Case Number: - 3310860/2022.
4.2.7 Did the Respondents or the Claimant unreasonably fail to comply with it by [specify alleged breach?
4.2.8 If so is it just and equitable to increase or decrease any award payable to the Claimant? By what proportion, up to 25%?
4.2.9 If the Claimant was unfairly dismissed, did s/he cause or contribute to dismissal by blameworthy conduct?
4.2.10 If so, would it be just and equitable to reduce the Claimant’s compensatory award? By what proportion?
4.2.11 Does the statutory cap of fifty-two weeks’ pay or £86,444 apply?
4.3 What basic award is payable to the Claimant, if any?
4.4 Would it be just and equitable to reduce the basic award because of any conduct of the Claimant before the dismissal? If so, to what extent?

5. Wrongful dismissal / Notice pay

5.1 What was the Claimant’s notice period?
5.2 Was the Claimant paid for that notice period? The Respondents accepts that the Claimant was not paid for the notice period.
5.3 If not, was the Claimant guilty of gross misconduct? / did the Claimant do something so serious that the Respondents was entitled to dismiss without notice?

6. Indirect discrimination (Equality Act 2010 section 19)

6.1 A “PCP” is a provision, criterion or practice. Did the Respondents have the following PCP:
6.2 Migrant workers were requested to work overtime without pay.
6.3 On 03 March 2022 Migrant workers were told there would be no annual leave or sick leave and that they would be working 10 hours a day for 6 days a week.
6.4 Requiring Migrant workers work on the weekends.
6.5 Migrant workers were told they would be paid overtime for weekend working and then they were not. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.
6.6 Did the Respondents apply the PCP to the Claimant?
6.7 Did the Respondents apply the PCP to persons with whom the Claimant does not share the characteristic, e.g., UK citizens or would it have done so?
6.8 Did the PCP put persons with whom the Claimant shares the characteristic, e.g., migrant workers from India at a particular disadvantage when compared with persons with whom the Claimant does not share the characteristic, e.g. UK Citizens, in that the emails were only distributed to the migrant workers. The Respondents says that the British National that the Claimant refers to (Maria Esguerra) was part of a different department and held a managerial role which is why she was not included in the emails.
6.9 Did the PCP put the Claimant at that disadvantage?
6.10 Was the PCP a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim? The Respondents says that its aims were:
6.10.1 Business needs
6.11 The Tribunal will decide in particular:
6.11.1 was the PCP an appropriate and reasonably necessary way to achieve those aims.
6.11.2 could something less discriminatory have been done instead.
6.11.3 how should the needs of the Claimant and the Respondents be balanced?
6.2 Direct Race Discrimination (Equality Act 2010 section 13)
6.2.1 This claim was added by Judge L Brown at the hearing on the 18 July 2023 pursuant to her general case management rules under Rule 29 of the Employment Rules of Procedure.
6.2.2 The Claimant is a non-British National migrant worker, and she compares herself with British-National workers.
6.2.3 Did the Respondents treat the Claimant less favourably on the grounds of race and in particular as a non-British-national migrant worker compared to British-national workers on the 9 March 2022 after she advised Mr Refugio that she was Case Number: - 3310860/2022. resigning, and by their later alleged dismissal of the Claimant that day?
6.2.4 Was that less favourable treatment?
6.2.5 The Tribunal will decide whether the Claimant was treated worse than someone else was treated. There must be no material difference between their circumstances and the Claimant’s.
6.2.6 The Claimant says she was treated worse than the following British-national workers: -
6.2.6.1 Maryam Sufi who left in September 2020.
6.2.6.2 Luca Theodorou who left in October 2021.
6.2.6.3 Martin Patrick who left in June 2021.

7. Remedy for discrimination or victimisation

7.1 Should the Tribunal make a recommendation that the Respondents take steps to reduce any adverse effect on the Claimant? What should it recommend?
7.2 What financial losses has the discrimination caused the Claimant?
7.3 Has the Claimant taken reasonable steps to replace lost earnings, for example by looking for another job?
7.4 If not, for what period of loss should the Claimant be compensated?
7.5 What injury to feelings has the discrimination caused the Claimant and how much compensation should be awarded for that?
7.6 Has the discrimination caused the Claimant personal injury and how much compensation should be awarded for that?
7.7 Is there a chance that the Claimant’s employment would have ended in any event? Should their compensation be reduced as a result?
7.8 Did the ACAS Code of Practice on Disciplinary and Grievance Procedures apply?
7.9 Did the Respondents or the Claimant unreasonably fail to comply with it? Case Number: - 3310860/2022.
7.10 If so, is it just and equitable to increase or decrease any award payable to the Claimant?
7.11 By what proportion, up to 25%?
7.12 Should interest be awarded? How much?

8. Unauthorised deductions

8.1 Did the Respondents make unauthorised deductions from the Claimant’s wages and if so, how much was deducted? The Respondents accepts that the final wages were not paid to the Claimant and will attempt to resolve the matter prior to the final hearing.

9. Remedy

9.1 How much should the Claimant be awarded?
9.2 Any other remedy? Schedule A2 Trade Union & Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 cases
9.3 Did the ACAS Code of Practice on Disciplinary and Grievance Procedures apply?
9.4 Did the Respondents or the Claimant unreasonably fail to comply with it?
9.5 Is it just and equitable to increase or decrease any award payable to the Claimant?
9.6 By what proportion, up to 25%? Schedule 5 Employment Act 2002 cases
9.7 When these proceedings were begun, was the Respondents in breach of its duty to give the Claimant a written statement of employment particulars or of a change to those particulars?
9.8 If the claim succeeds, are there exceptional circumstances that would make it unjust or inequitable to make the minimum award of two weeks’ pay under section 38 of the Employment Act 2002? If not, the Tribunal must award two weeks’ pay and may award four weeks’ pay.
9.9 Would it be just and equitable to award four weeks’ pay? Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

13. At the case management hearing, which resulted in the Brady CMO, the Respondents had applied to strike out the Claimants claim for Unfair Dismissal (“Strike Out Application”). Because the Claimants claim had transferred from the First Respondent to the Second Respondent on the 23 January 2022 the Respondents contended that due to the two Respondents not being associated employers, within the meaning of s.231 of the Employment Rights Act 1996, that the Claimant did not have the required service of two years continuous employment with the Second Respondent to bring a claim. However, at the case management hearing the Respondents withdrew their application for a strike out, conceding they could not argue that her claim for Unfair Dismissal had no reasonable prospect of success.

14. Paragraph 40 of the Brady CMO summarised the following about the Response of both the First and Second Respondents: - “The claim is about Unfair Dismissal, Indirect Race Discrimination, Notice Pay and the Unauthorised Deduction of Wages. The respondent’s defence is that the claimant was not dismissed, but that she resigned. This is contrary to the Grounds of Resistance that has been filed. The Respondent says that this is an error and will write to the Tribunal to request to amend the Grounds of Resistance.”

15. As a result, it was ordered at paragraph 9 of the Brady CMO as follows: The Respondent must write to the Tribunal and the other side by 05 May 2023 setting out their application to amendment the Grounds of Resistance.

16. No such application to amend the Grounds of Resistance was ever made by the First or Second Respondent.

Concession by the Respondents on Continuous Service

17. In relation to the Strike Out Application, on 7 June 2023, Mr Tidy from Croner Law then conceded, as follows in an email to the Claimant: -

“Dear Mayuri

We are no longer contesting the continuous service point. This was contested by my client without any legal knowledge or assistance on the matter. Hopefully, this means we do not need to bother you with evidence of your work.

Kind regards

Jacob”

18. At no point did Mr Hoyle dispute, during the final hearing and on behalf of the Respondents, that the email in paragraph 17 above (“the Tidy Email”) was Case Number: - 3310860/2022. anything other than a full concession by the First and Second Respondents on this part of their defence.

Procedure

19. The Claimant gave evidence at the First Hearing and called evidence from: -  Mr Kurotimi M. Fems;  Mr Gilbert Taylor;  Ms Tanyatorn Autchayawat;  Mr Oladimeji Oladapo.

20. The Claimant also relied on a joint Written Statement entitled ‘To Whom It May Concern’ from: -  José Rodrigo Barrozo;  Wiggle Gey Castro;  Mark Joseph Hui; and  Princess Gilese Oxicino. As these witnesses did not attend the First and Second Hearing, we did not attach any weight to their joint statement.

21. The Respondents called Mrs Germin Mohamed, a qualified Solicitor and Director of the Second Respondent, to give evidence at the Second Hearing but did not call anyone else.

22. There was also a written witness statement from a Parak Chouhan on behalf of the Respondent. We did not attach weight to this statement as this witness did not attend the hearing.

23. There was also a written witness statement from Mr Ian Refugio on behalf of both Respondents. We did not attach weight to this statement as this witness left the hearing before he could be cross-examined.

24. We had a bundle of documents prepared by the Claimant that was referred to by both parties at the hearing and was 95 pages long.

25. The bundle of documents was supplemented throughout the hearing by the following documents emailed to the Tribunal: -

(a) Correspondence regarding disclosure between the parties.
(b) Statement of Particulars of employment sent to the Claimant by the First Respondent dated the 4 February 2019. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.
(c) Letters of appointment for the medical appointments of Mrs Germin Mohamed.
(d) A variety of email correspondence between Mr Refugio and some of the witnesses together with screenshots of WhatsApp messages. The Hearing on the 17, 18, 19 and 20 July 2023 (“the First Hearing”) First Postponement Application

26. Prior to the hearing commencing, the Respondents applied for a postponement of the hearing on the grounds of the ill health of their witness Mrs Germin Mohamed, and due to the medical appointments of Mrs Germin Mohamed but this was refused by Judge Quill (“First Postponement Application”).

Second Postponement Application

27. This Hearing commenced at 10.00 am on 17 July 2023. Initially there were technical problems as the clerk to the hearing could not hear me and the parties also had difficulties hearing me speak. The parties at my request left the hearing and rejoined but the sound problems remained and so I adjourned the hearing until 10.30 am while the clerk sought technical help. At 10.30 am whilst the Claimant could now hear me Mr Hoyle for the Respondents could not, and it was also very difficult for me to hear what he was saying. I ascertained that he was applying for a postponement of the hearing on the basis he had only received the Claimant’s witness statements on Saturday 15 July 2023 (“Second Postponement Application”). I noted there were five witness statements, including the Claimant’s witness statement.

28. Due to the technical difficulties, and upon concluding the hearing would not be able to go ahead until those technical difficulties had been overcome, I ordered the hearing would be postponed until the next day on the 18 July at 10.00 am, as this would give the Respondents time to read the Claimant’s statements and would also allow the Tribunal time to overcome the difficulties with the CVP hearing technology.

29. The hearing then recommenced at 10.00 am on the 18 July 2023. The clerk and all parties stated they could hear me clearly. Mr Hoyle stated that he could not hear me as well as he would like to. I said in that case he would have to attend in person in Cambridge. He said this was not possible and I asked him where he was based and he replied Nottingham. I pointed out that he would clearly be able to attend in Cambridge the next day at the very least. He stated he would continue with the hearing and tell me if he had difficulties hearing me. After this point no difficulties in hearing me were reported by Mr Hoyle. Amendment of the Claim and the introduction of a claim of Direct Race Discrimination Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

30. At the outset of the adjourned hearing on day two of the hearing I raised the issue of the Claimants claim of indirect race discrimination. I explained that in accordance with the recent case of D v E 2023 EAT it was established law that a provision, criterion or practice (‘PCP’) had to be neutral and apply to everyone in the workforce for such a clam to be brought, and that the PCP’s defined ( as set out in paragraph 6 of the Brady CMO inserted into paragraph 12 above) did not appear to me to be neutral PCP’s as the PCP’s as set out in the Brady CMO were stated as being PCP’s only applicable to the migrant workers employed by the Respondents and as such were framed in a discriminatory way.

31. I added that in any event it was clear to the me that this claim also appeared to be a claim about direct race discrimination. In particular I read out the following passage from the Claimant’s ET1 form which stated: - ‘I believe I am owed £7930.29 by IANS Group. I believe that I am eligible for compensation of 10,000 pounds under discrimination on the basis of immigration status in that a British national would not have been treated the same way I was when I informed the Respondents of my intention to leave the employment. I was mentally distraught and devastated as the Respondents called me selfish, ungrateful for the opportunity given and accused me of a breach of trust for wanting to switch employment. I was mentally disturbed and was extremely stressful during this time as I had no other means of income to support myself in the UK.’

32. I asked the Claimant if this claim set out in her ET1 form was in effect her asserting that if a non-migrant worker/British-national worker had resigned they would not have been treated in this way. She confirmed that this was what she was saying. I explained to her that this was in fact a direct race discrimination claim in relation to the alleged treatment of her and then her alleged forced resignation/alleged dismissal by the Respondents of her that day. She confirmed that she understood what I was explaining to her in that she was accusing the Respondents of direct discrimination in that part of her ET1.

33. I therefore stated that of my own initiative and under my case management powers, under Rule 29 of the Employment Tribunal Rules of Procedure, that I proposed to add, subject to what the Respondents had to say, a claim of Direct Race Discrimination.

34. I then heard from the Respondents’ representative who objected in the strongest terms to her claim being amended in this way. He stated that the Claimant was a qualified solicitor. That she had had ample opportunity and was properly qualified to plead her own case. He stated that his colleague, Mr Tidy, who had previously conducted this case and attended the previous preliminary hearing before Judge Brady had commented to him that the Claimant had arrived with detailed written submissions which set out her claim for Indirect Race Discrimination only. He said that claim referred to migrant workers not Indian nationals, and as a consequence the claim related to migrant workers generally not an Indian worker specifically. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

35. He said he objected to the re-pleading, and he objected to it being re- pleaded by this Tribunal and that he was here to defend an indirect discrimination claim and not a direct discrimination claim and that it was wholly unfair to do this to his client on day two of the hearing. No other prejudice was cited by Mr Hoyle other than they had prepared to defend the claim on the basis of indirect discrimination not direct discrimination. He did not point towards any particular evidence that would be needed to defend the claim of direct race discrimination which they did not have available at this hearing.

36. I pointed out that the case of Selkent Bus Company v Moore [1996] ICR 836 was the well-known authority, and that where an amendment was simply a relabelling of something plain on the face of the claim form, as here, a relabelling of the claim could be permitted. I said it could not be disputed that it was plain from the face of the claim form that there was an allegation of direct race discrimination in relation to the events on the day that the Claimant left her employment on the 9 March 2022.

37. The Claimant stated that while she was a qualified solicitor, she was a newly qualified solicitor with no experience in litigation. She pointed out that she qualified in India and had no litigation experience. She pointed out that while she did her training in the UK, she didn't get any experience in litigation and specialised in immigration law. She said she was a litigant in person and the Respondents, despite being a law firm, had hired representation in the form of employments solicitors but she couldn't afford to do the same. She said she shouldn't be held to the standard of a professional representative and that would not be a level playing field.

38. At this point the Claimant then added that she had also, in her skeleton argument, referred to Harassment. I asked whether she made a specific application at the last open preliminary hearing for a claim of Harassment to be added and she said she did not make that application, but it was referred to in her skeleton argument submitted at that hearing. She clarified that she assumed Harassment was part of Indirect Race Discrimination. She also said that at the last open preliminary hearing, and after the Respondents read her skeleton argument, they conceded that they were no longer to applying to strike out her claims.

39. I clarified if she meant they had dropped the application to strike out her Unfair Dismissal claim, in that it was said the First and Second Respondents were not associated employers and therefore she did not have the required continuous service of two years employment. She clarified she did mean that they withdrew the strike out application in relation to the Unfair Dismissal claim.

40. I pointed out that the case management order did not refer to any claims of Harassment. I asked if she was applying to add Harassment to her pleaded claims and she said that she was. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

41. Mr Hoyle then submitted that she had received the Brady CMO summarising her claims at p.29 of the bundle and she had had the opportunity to say if it was wrong or incomplete and that they had had no opportunity to deal with any harassment claim, and that it would be a very unsafe thing to do for this Tribunal to second guess Employment Judge Brady. He submitted that that application should be refused and that it would not be right or proper to add another new claim, and with no reference in the claim form to harassment Selkent could not apply.

42. We then adjourned for fifteen minutes at 10.20 am to consider the Respondents objections to the introduction of a claim of direct race discrimination and harassment. We considered the relevant legal tests.

The Law on the Amendment Application

43. In particular in Selkent Bus Co Ltd t/a Stagecoach Selkent v Moore [1996] UKEAT/151/96 the EAT provided helpful guidance on the consideration of

applications to amend, per Mummery J:

(5) What are the relevant circumstances? It is impossible and undesirable to attempt to list them exhaustively, but the following are certainly relevant:

(a) The nature of the amendment Applications to amend are of many different kinds, ranging, on the one hand, from the correction of clerical and typing errors, the additions of factual details to existing allegations and the addition or substitution of other labels for facts already pleaded to, on the other hand, the making of entirely new factual allegations which change the basis of the existing claim. The Tribunal have to decide whether the amendment sought is one of the minor matters or is a substantial alteration pleading a new cause of action.
(b) The applicability of time limits If a new complaint or cause of action is proposed to be added by way of amendment, it is essential for the Tribunal to consider whether that complaint is out of time and, if so, whether the time limit should be extended under the applicable statutory provisions e.g., in the case of unfair dismissal, S.67 of the 1978 Act.
(c) The timing and manner of the application An application should not be refused solely because there has been a delay in making it. There are no time limits laid down in the Rules for the making of amendments. The amendments may be made at any time - before, at, even after the hearing of the case. Delay in making the application is, however, a discretionary factor. It is relevant to consider why the application was not made Case Number: - 3310860/2022. earlier and why it is now being made: for example, the discovery of new facts or new information appearing from documents disclosed on discovery. Whenever taking any factors into account, the paramount considerations are the relative injustice and hardship involved in refusing or granting an amendment. Questions of delay, as a result of adjournments, and additional costs, particularly if they are unlikely to be recovered by the successful party, are relevant in reaching a decision.

44. Whilst the Selkent factors will often be highly relevant to whether an amendment application is granted or not, this will not always be the case since the Tribunal is not engaged in a tick-box exercise; see Abercrombie v Aga Rangemaster Ltd [2014] ICR 209 CA.

45. Notably, even when an amendment would involve adding an out of time claim, this will not necessarily be decisive; see Transport and General Workers Union

v. Safeway Stores Ltd (2007) UKEAT/0092/07. Ultimately, the interests of justice require a balancing exercise.

46. The body of case law which has developed in connection with amendment applications was considered by the EAT in Vaughan v Modality Partnership [2021] IRLR 97, per HHJ Tayler:

20. In Abercrombie Underhill LJ went on to state this important consideration, at para [48]: ‘Consistently with that way of putting it, the approach of both the Employment Appeal Tribunal and this court in considering applications to amend which arguably raise new causes of action has been to focus not on questions of formal classification but on the extent to which the new pleading is likely to involve substantially different areas of enquiry than the old: the greater the difference between the factual and legal issues raised by the new claim and by the old, the less likely it is that it will be permitted.’

21. Underhill LJ focused on the practical consequences of allowing an amendment. Such a practical approach should underlie the entire balancing exercise. Representatives would be well advised to start by considering, possibly putting the Selkent factors to one side for a moment, what will be the real practical consequences of allowing or refusing the amendment. If the application to amend is refused how severe will the consequences be, in terms of the prospects of success of the claim or defence; if permitted what will be the practical problems in responding. This requires a focus on reality rather than assumptions. It requires representatives to take instructions, where possible, about matters such as whether witnesses remember the events and/or have records relevant to the matters raised in the proposed amendment. Representatives have a duty to advance arguments about prejudice on the basis instructions rather than supposition. They should not allege prejudice that does not really exist. It will often be appropriate to consent to an amendment Case Number: - 3310860/2022. that causes no real prejudice. This will save time and money and allow the parties and tribunal to get on with the job of determining the claim.

22. Refusal of an amendment will self-evidently always cause some perceived prejudice to the person applying to amend. They will have been refused permission to do something that they wanted to do, presumably for what they thought was a good reason. Submissions in favour of an application to amend should not rely only on the fact that a refusal will mean that the applying party does not get what they want; the real question is will they be prevented from getting what they need. This requires an explanation of why the amendment is of practical importance because, for example, it is necessary to advance an important part of a claim or defence. This is not a risk-free exercise as it potentially exposes a weakness in a claim or defence that might be exploited if the application is refused. That is why it is always much better to get pleadings right in the first place, rather than having to seek a discretionary amendment later. […]

24. It is also important to consider the Selkent factors in the context of the balance of justice. For example:

24.1 A minor amendment may correct an error that could cause a claimant great prejudice if the amendment were refused because a vital component of a claim would be missing.
24.2 An amendment may result in the respondent suffering prejudice because they have to face a cause of action that would have been dismissed as out of time had it been brought as a new claim.
24.3 A late amendment may cause prejudice to the respondent because it is more difficult to respond to and results in unnecessary wasted costs.

25. No one factor is likely to be decisive. The balance of justice is always key.

47. HHJ Tayler reiterated some of these points recently in Chaudhry v Cerberus Security and Monitoring Services Ltd EA-2020-000381-OO, when he emphasised that Tribunals should remain focused on the balance of injustice and/or hardship of allowing or refusing the amendment.

48. In Chandhok v Tirkey [2015] ICR 527 EAT, per Langstaff P it was said as follows: 16 […] The claim, as set out in the ET1, is not something just to set the ball rolling, as an initial document necessary to comply with time limits but which is otherwise free to be augmented by whatever the parties choose to add or subtract merely on their say so. Instead, it serves not only a useful but a necessary function. It sets out the essential case. It is that to which a respondent is required to respond. A respondent is not required to answer a Case Number: - 3310860/2022. witness statement, nor a document, but the claims made— meaning, under the Employment Tribunals Rules of Procedure 2013 (SI 2013/1237), the claim as set out in the ET1. 17 … the starting point is that the parties must set out the essence of their respective cases on paper in respectively the ET1 and the answer to it. If it were not so, then there would be no obvious principle by which reference to any further document (witness statement, or the like) could be restricted. Such restriction is needed to keep litigation within sensible bounds, and to ensure that a degree of informality does not become unbridled licence. The ET1 and ET3 have an important function in ensuring that a claim is brought, and responded to, within stringent time limits. If a “claim” or a “case” is to be understood as being far wider than that which is set out in the ET1 or ET3, it would be open to a litigant after the expiry of any relevant time limit to assert that the case now put had all along been made, because it was “their case”, and in order to argue that the time limit had no application to that case could point to other documents or statements, not contained within the claim form. Such an approach defeats the purpose of permitting or denying amendments; it allows issues to be based on shifting sands; it ultimately denies that which clear-headed justice most needs, which is focus. It is an enemy of identifying, and in the light of the identification resolving, the central issues in dispute. 18 In summary, a system of justice involves more than allowing parties at any time to raise the case which best seems to suit the moment from their perspective. It requires each party to know in essence what the other is saying, so they can properly meet it; so that they can tell if a tribunal may have lost jurisdiction on time grounds; so that the costs incurred can be kept to those which are proportionate; so that the time needed for a case, and the expenditure which goes hand in hand with it, can be provided for both by the parties and by the tribunal itself, and enable care to be taken that any one case does not deprive others of their fair share of the resources of the system. It should provide for focus on the central issues. That is why there is a system of claim and response, and why an employment tribunal should take very great care not to be diverted into thinking that the essential case is to be found elsewhere than in the pleadings.

49. In the case of Cocking v Sandhurst (Stationers) Ltd [1974] ICR 650 at 657BC it is stated that: “In deciding whether or not to exercise their discretion to allow an amendment, the Tribunal should in every case have regard to all the circumstances of the case. In particular they should consider any injustice or hardship which may be caused to any of the parties, including those proposed to be added, if the proposed amendment were allowed or, as the case may be, refused.”

50. We also had regard to the case of Parekh v London Borough of Brent [2012] EWCA Civ 1630 [2012] EWCA Civ 1630 where it is made clear a list of issues is not a pleading and a Tribunal is not required to adhere to it ‘slavishly.’ Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

51. In Selkent it was established that Tribunal must have regard to the nature of the amendment, the applicability of time limits and the timing and manner of the application. The amendment proposed by this Tribunal was a relabelling of a claim apparent from the face of the ET1 form and this was not disputed by the Respondents during the hearing. As to the manner of the application this did not apply as this was introduced by this Tribunal pursuant to my case management powers under Rule 29 and in accordance with the interests of justice.

52. On the issue of time limits we had regard to the fact that in this case the relabelling of the claim of direct race discrimination was outside the statutory time limit, but this was only one factor we had to consider. In accordance with Selkent we had to consider whether this amendment was minor or significant, but in particular we considered that it was ‘the addition or substitution of other labels for facts already pleaded to,’ in that the adding of the direct race discrimination claim was simply a new label for what was set out on the face of the ET1.

53. In any event on the issue of the timing of the amendment of the claim in the Vaughan case HHJ Taylor referred to the reasoning of this test by Underhill P, as he then was, in the case of Safeway Stores. He stated that on a correct reading of Selkent the fact that an amendment would introduce a claim that was out of time was not decisive against allowing the amendment but was a factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise.

Decision on Amendment

54. After adjourning to make our decision at 10.35 am the hearing recommenced and we gave our decision, which was that the Claimant be permitted to pursue her claim of direct race discrimination on the grounds that the Claimant alleged that as a non-British national migrant worker she was treated less favourably because of race compared to a British-national worker.

55. I stated that we had balanced the hardship between the parties and the prejudice to each party when reaching our decision. In particular that the allegation of direct race discrimination had been on the face of the ET1 from the outset and the Respondents would not be prejudiced in any way by this allegation which had always formed part of the Claimants claim. The hardship to the Claimant of not being allowed to pursue this claim as direct race discrimination was obvious. She would lose the right to bring a claim for direct race discrimination on one of the major allegations in her case that being the events that occurred on the last day of her employment by the Respondents.

56. The Respondents were already responding to the allegation made by the Claimant i.e., about the manner in which Mr Refugio was alleged to have treated the Claimant on the 9 March 2022, in their witness statements, and there was no Case Number: - 3310860/2022. hardship caused to them in relation to being able to defend, at this stage, a claim of direct race discrimination.

57. After balancing the hardship and prejudice between the parties we found the hardship and prejudice to the Claimant of not being able to bring this claim was greater to the Claimant than any hardship or prejudice to the Respondents of defending this claim and I therefore ordered that the claim of direct race discrimination be added to the Claimant’s claims.

58. Sometime later in the hearing I revisited the claim of direct race discrimination and asked the Claimant to confirm which incidents this claim of direct race discrimination related to. The Claimant confirmed that it related to the events on the 9 March 2022 when she advised Mr Refugio that she was resigning, and her dismissal when he insisted, she resign that day, but that her other claim prior to the events of that day still related to indirect race discrimination on the basis of the pleaded PCP’s.

Comparators

59. I asked the Claimant to provide her comparators for the direct race discrimination claim and she provided them by email to the Tribunal and they were defined as:

(a) Maryam Sufi who left in September 2020.
(b) Luca Theodorou who left in October 2021.
(c) Martin Patrick who left in June 2021. Application to add a claim of Harassment.

60. In relation to the application that the Claimant had made to add a claim of harassment this application was rejected. There was no mention of harassment on the grounds of race on the face of the ET1 form and the Claimant, despite using the word harassment in a written skeleton argument, had not made any application to add that claim at the previous open preliminary hearing before Judge Brady.

61. This would be the introduction of a new claim significantly outside the limitation period. ACAS conciliation started on the 08 June 2022 and if the harassment claim related to her treatment on the 9 March 2022, then she was seeking to introduce that claim 11 months outside the limitation period, assuming she had at least one month to issue such a claim from the date of the ACAS certificate, date B, which was issued on the 19 July 2022. This meant such a claim would have had to have been brought by the 19 August 2022, 11 months before the date of the application by the Claimant on the 19 July 2023. When balancing the hardship between the parties the hardship to the Respondents was greater. They would have an entirely new cause of action to defend during the hearing which they were not prepared for. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

62. We had regard to the caselaw above, and in particular Selkent and Chandok, but also took into account of the case of Vaughan on the issue of the timing of the amendment of the claim as set out in the Vaughan case where HHJ Taylor referred to the reasoning of this test by Underhill P, as he then was, in the case of Safeway Stores, and where he stated that on a correct reading of Selkent the fact that an amendment would introduce a claim that was out of time was not decisive against allowing the amendment but was a factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise.

63. However, and on balance we did not consider we should allow the introduction of a new claim of harassment outside the statutory time limits of 11 months, particularly where such a claim was not evident on the face of the ET1 form, and this was therefore not a case of relabelling as with the case of direct race discrimination. We found that allowing the introduction of a harassment claim would cause severe hardship and prejudice. In Selkent it was said: - ‘An amendment may result in the Respondents suffering prejudice because they have to face a cause of action that would have been dismissed as out of

time had it been brought as a new claim.’

64. This claim if brought as a new claim would in all likelihood have been dismissed as out of time. In addition, the Claimant had not pursued any formal application before Judge Brady and although the Claimant stated that she thought harassment was part of a claim of indirect race discrimination we did not find her legal ignorance on this issue should outweigh the prejudice to the Respondents that they would suffer if we allowed the claim to be added in at this late stage. Third, and Fourth Postponement Applications during the First Hearing

65. On the second day of the hearing, Tuesday the 18 July, prior to cross- examination of the Claimant commencing, the Respondents stated that Ms Germin Mohamed would not be able to attend the Tribunal on Thursday the 20 July as she had two medical appointments, one in the morning and one in the afternoon, but that she would be available on the Friday 21 July. I explained that this case, though listed for five days, would not take place on Friday the 21 July as I was on annual leave that day and the Tribunal would only be sitting for four days until the 20 July 2023.

Third Postponement Application

66. Mr Hoyle then applied for the hearing to finish part-heard and be postponed at the end of the next day on the Wednesday the 19 July. This was in effect the third application for a postponement of the hearing (“Third Postponement Application”).

67. I suggested that the Respondents witness, i.e., Mrs Germin Mohamed, could give her evidence first that day on the 18 July instead of the Claimant. Mr Hoyle Case Number: - 3310860/2022. objected to this and asserted the Claimant should go first as he was certain he would get concessions from the Claimant during cross-examination. I asked Mr Hoyle to email me the medical evidence upon which Mrs Germin Mohamed relied for her non-attendance on Thursday the 20 July 2023, and that we would consider it first before making our decision.

68. Later in the hearing and after the lunch break, I advised Mr Hoyle that after having considered the medical evidence we had decided Mrs Germin Mohammed could give evidence the next day on the Wednesday 19 July in the morning, after the cross examination of the Claimant had ended and before her witnesses gave evidence, and that her evidence would be interposed, and that his application for the hearing to finish early on the 19 July was refused.

69. Mrs Mohamed then addressed me directly and said she was not comfortable giving evidence ahead of the Claimants witnesses and I replied that was the decision of this Tribunal and it would stand.

Fourth Postponement Application

70. On the third day of the hearing, on Wednesday the 19 July, at the outset the issue of a postponement was raised again (“Fourth Postponement Application”). Mr Hoyle stated Ms Mohammed’s need to attend her medical appointments on the Thursday 20 July was urgent. Her interposed evidence was anticipated to start that day on Wednesday the 19 July, and he applied in effect for an adjournment of the hearing by close of play on Wednesday the 19 July, on the grounds that on the Thursday the 20 July he said he would be without instructions from Mrs Germin Mohamed,

71. I stated that there had been no need for Mrs Mohamed to make medical appointments for the Thursday 20 July while a Tribunal hearing was taking place. They were outpatient appointments for medical treatment. I said I was unimpressed that following the First Postponement Application being made on these grounds, before this hearing commenced, and they were refused by Judge Quill, that she had gone ahead and made these appointments for the 20 July while a hearing was taking place, and that this medical evidence was not evidence of an inability to attend the hearing due to ill-health as she was here at the hearing. I said under Rule 30(A) there had to be exceptional circumstances to postpone the hearing. After some discussion he asked me to hear directly from Mrs Mohamed as this was a ‘sensitive matter.’

72. Mrs Mohamed then explained to me she had an abscess on her breast that needed draining urgently and that originally, she had an appointment for Monday the 17 July, the first day of the hearing, but had cancelled it when the First Postponement Request had been refused and had re-arranged it for the Thursday the 20 July. She advised she had done so as it needed draining urgently. She then stated she could cancel her Thursday morning appointment but would be unable to attend the hearing on the Thursday afternoon as that was when the abscess would be drained. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

73. We retired to make a decision. We then returned and stated that as in effect this hearing would go part-heard in any event by close of play on the 21 July, we therefore granted the application for the hearing to finish by no later than

1.30 pm on Thursday the 21 July so that Mrs Mohamed could receive her urgently required medical treatment that afternoon. I relisted the part-heard hearing for the 23-25 October 2023. Disclosure applications by the Respondents and the Claimant

74. An issue then arose about the lack of disclosure from the Respondents on the issue of whether the First and Second Respondents were associated employers. The Claimant stated that Mr Tidy had conceded this point of continuous employment between the First and Second Respondents in the Tidy Email, and as a result there was no reference about any of this in her witness statement, but that Mr Hoyle had now apparently reopened the issue again. She asked if she would need to cross-examine on this issue. I said as we had not yet determined this matter of whether that point had been conceded by the Respondents she would need to do so.

75. I suggested she may prefer for disclosure on this point before cross-examining Mrs Mohamed and she agreed she would. She said there was no disclosure in the bundle when she prepared it for the hearing as she thought the issue was no longer in dispute. Further discussion then took place, and it was agreed that the Claimants last witnesses evidence would finish on the morning of the Thursday 20 July and that Mrs Mohamed would not give evidence until the relisted hearing in October 2023. I explained her evidence would no longer be interposed that day of the 19 or the next day of the 20 July as had originally been ordered by me. I said that it would be unsatisfactory for her to be under oath during the months between the end of the hearing and the hearing restarting on the 23 October 2023, as she was likely to be if she commenced giving evidence on that day or on the next day on Thursday the 20 July until leaving for her medical appointment at 1.30 pm. The Claimant did not object to this.

76. In the event the evidence of the Claimants last witness, ran on into the morning of the Thursday the 20 July, and after that witness concluded on the morning of the 20 July, the disclosure applications made by both parties ran until around

1.30 pm when the hearing concluded part heard.

77. On Thursday 20 July 2023 disclosure applications were made by the Respondents for all emails between the Claimant and her witnesses relating to the preparation of their witness statements. Mr Hoyle asked for an order for disclosure directly against each witness in support of the Claimant, and for an order that all their emails to the Claimant, and all her emails to them, together with all attachments be ordered to be forwarded by each witness to Mr Hoyle. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

78. He said the reason for this application, which he made against the Claimant’s witnesses individually, and not against the Claimant, was that he suspected and indeed asserted, that she had coached her witnesses and amended their statements after they prepared them. He pointed out that when you studied the metadata, she was the author of the statements and in some of the statements of her witnesses she had clearly gone in and out of the documents at certain points, thereby evidencing her amending and coaching the witnesses.

79. The Claimant responded saying she had not coached them or amended their statements, that she was happy to admit she sent a template to them all to help them when preparing their statements, and that therefore showed her as the author of the statements in the metadata, but at no point had she amended their statements. She asserted the simple act of opening and closing the documents would make it look like an amendment, but she hadn’t amended them. She said she was happy to send the initial emails sent to her witnesses with the templates attached to Mr Hoyle.

80. At this point, Mr Hoyle responded and said: - ‘you are lying, and I can prove it – your demeanour just changed when you gave that explanation and you have become animated whereas before you have not been.’

81. I had already stopped Mr Hoyle’s cross-examination of the Claimant’s witness on this issue of metadata, and what it showed, as we did not have the metadata in front of us that he was referring to, and nor did the Claimant, and it was a highly technical issue. The Claimants witnesses had already had the allegation of the Claimant coaching them put to them all by Mr Hoyle and it seemed unnecessary to me for Mr Hoyle to put it in that way to her, i.e., that her denial of tampering during his disclosure application was a lie as evidenced by her changed demeanour at that point in the hearing. In particular he had already cross-examined her and her witnesses on this issue, and their evidence was now finished, and this was simply now an application for disclosure from him subsequent to that very forceful cross-examination.

82. I noted that the Claimant looked distressed and appeared to be fighting back tears. I stated to Mr Hoyle that Judges were specifically discouraged from drawing inferences from changes in the demeanour of witnesses as this could be due to cultural differences and different people reacted differently to being called liars. I said that it was quite oppressive of him to comment on her alleged changed demeanour, when she objected to his application and gave her account of why her witnesses statements showed her to be the author of their statements, and to respond by saying she was lying, and that he could prove it by reference to her change in demeanour.

83. The Claimant objected to his application for specific disclosure, though said she would voluntarily send the email with the original template attached that she had sent to each witness. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

Rejection of Respondents Disclosure Application

84. We then adjourned to make our decision. On our return I advised of our decision. I advised Mr Hoyle that his application was rejected on the following grounds: -

(i) We had an application by the Respondents for disclosure of all emails between the Claimant and her witnesses in relation to the preparation of their witness statements. Mr Hoyle had said this was relevant because he said the Claimants witnesses had been coached or influenced in the writing of their statements by the Claimant. In particular that in paragraph three of their witness statements, where reference was made to the British nationals who worked with the Respondents, that this paragraph was the same in each witness statement of the Claimant’s witnesses, and he asserted that because of this there must have been coaching and undue and improper influence by the Claimant in telling them what to write in their witness statements. He stated that he wished to see the actual e-mail trails – that he wanted them forwarding to him with the attachments so he could study the metadata - and that he thought it would show that there had been evidence of the Claimant amending the witnesses witness statements.
(ii) I stated that this application was not successful, and we were not persuaded that it would show that the Claimant had made amendments to the substance of the witness statements. We had concluded that all this metadata would show was that the Claimant had made amendments of some sort, and that it may have been a formatting issue, or she may have been hitting the return bar, and that having considered this application under my powers under Rule 31, which concerned an order against a third party that they disclose documents – i.e. witnesses, and Mr Hoyle had said the application was against the witnesses themselves not against the Claimant - that whilst we did as a Tribunal have a power to make an order for production of documents from third parties, we only should do so if we think it meets the relevant legal tests which I then dealt with.
(iii) Overall, I said we considered this a fishing expedition. Mr Hoyle had extensively cross examined the Claimant and her witnesses on the issue and we would draw our own conclusions on whether or not the Claimant sought to influence or tamper with the witnesses’ statements. She had given a clear explanation to us in response to this application of how she did send the witnesses templates to use in preparing their statements, and she had even offered to send to Mr Hoyle those emails she sent to the witnesses attaching a template for them to use, and that this explained why she was the author of the documents. I said we made no order that the Claimant should forward those emails to the Respondents, but if she chose to do so she may.
(iv) I stated that we considered the application entirely disproportionate to the issue in accordance with recent cases such as Santander UK plc and others v Case Number: - 3310860/2022. Bharaj UKEAT/0075/20, and that we had reminded ourselves of the legal tests set out in that case as follows: -
a. Is the application for specific disclosure proportionate to the issues? The issue here was about the allegation that witnesses had been coached by the Claimant. We decided the application was not proportionate to that issue. Mr Hoyle had extensively cross examined the Claimant and all her witnesses on that issue, and we were able to draw our own conclusions on the allegations of coaching, and undue and improper influence by the Claimant over her witnesses and the application made was not proportionate to that issue.
b. We only had to order specific disclosure if we thought it was necessary for fairly disposing of the proceedings. We did not consider the issue to be of such relevance that it was necessary to make the order sought to fairly dispose of the proceedings, i.e. to order all of the Claimants witnesses forward to Mr Hoyle all emails between them and the Claimant on the issue of witness statements and the finalising of the statements, with all attachments so he could study the metadata in the attachments in order to fairly dispose of the proceedings. It was not at all clear to us in particular in any event that the e-mails, the attachments and the metadata in the documents would show if such coaching of her witnesses took place so we considered this the order was not necessary for fairly disposing of the proceedings.
c. Overall, we considered the application to be little more than a fishing expedition. Mr Hoyle had stated that he ‘took some risk’ in making the application as the documents ‘might not’ show what he was alleging and in our view this statement more than any showed that this was a simple fishing expedition in the hope he would uncover some improper conduct by the Claimant.

85. The Claimant then asked me to make an order of some sort to stop Mr Hoyle being so oppressive in his conduct of the proceedings. At this point I noted the Claimant was still looking very distressed and appeared to be trying not to cry. I responded stating that there was no such order I could make, and Mr Hoyle was entitled to conduct his advocacy as forcefully as he chose but if I thought at any point, I had to intervene I would do so.

86. Mr Hoyle then complained about my previous use of the word ‘oppressive’ in describing his allegation during the application for disclosure, that the Claimant was lying, and which was proven by her changed demeanour, and stated he ‘was taking advice’ about my use of the word ‘oppressive’ in relation to him. He said the definition of ‘oppressive’ was the misuse of power and control and as he was neither a solicitor or a barrister, he had no power or control. This Case Number: - 3310860/2022. appeared a strange assertion as he did have power and control as an advocate cross-examining in the Tribunal and his particular qualifications had no bearing on the issue of whether any particular allegations, he put to the Claimant about her were oppressive or not.

87. I replied that I had made a statement that his allegation against the Claimant of lying, by reference to her changed demeanour in court, was oppressive in the context of the application for disclosure being made at that point in the hearing, and I did not say he was an oppressive advocate. I pointed out that the Claimant was a litigant in person and that I must have regard to that when ensuring a fair hearing for all parties.

88. In particular when telling Mr Hoyle during the hearing I thought his allegation about the Claimant’s changed demeanour was oppressive I had regard to the Equal Treatment Bench Book where it is stated at paragraph 17 that: - Judges must be aware of the feelings and difficulties experienced by litigants in person and be ready and able to help them with the court process, especially if a represented party is being oppressive or confrontational.

89. There then followed a discussion about disclosure prior to the next hearing. In particular this concerned the issue of whether the First and Second Respondents were associated employers or not under the ERA 1996 s.231, and whether the First and Second Respondent should be treated as associated on the test of ‘control’, and whether one was a company of which the other (directly or indirectly) had control, or whether both were companies of which a third person (directly or indirectly) had control.

Claimant’s Disclosure Application

90. The Claimant stated she wanted evidence of all work done for the First and Second Respondents over the last three years. She complained that this point had been conceded by Mr Tidy in the Tidy Email, but Mr Hoyle was now running the argument again. I stated that on the point of whether it had been conceded this Tribunal would consider that when delivering Judgment on the issue. She also requested copies of all her annual leave requests during her employment with both Respondents.

91. I reminded Mr Hoyle we had not accepted that he could re-open this argument of continuity of employment between the First and Second Respondent and this would be addressed by us in our Judgment. He took no issue with this approach.

92. I pointed out to the Claimant that her application for evidence of all work done by her for the Respondents over three years was a very long period of time and Case Number: - 3310860/2022. asked why evidence for the last month with the First Respondents, and for the last month with the Second Respondents would not be sufficient. She agreed this would be more proportionate.

93. Mr Hoyle then objected to any disclosure on this and said it was all ‘a fishing expedition’ and the information sought was ‘privileged and confidential’.

Rejection of Claimant’s Disclosure Application

94. We considered the Claimants application. We decided the documents sought did not assist on whether the First or Second Respondents had control of the other and were associated employers under s.231 of the Employment Rights Act 1996, and that instead details of ownership of the companies would assist more on this point as this would evidence who had control of the companies and that we should order disclosure of the last set of company accounts of both the Respondents.

95. We also decided that the P45 and P60 of the Claimant for each Respondent would assist on the issue of continuity of employment.

96. We therefore refused the application for disclosure of work allocation to the Claimant by the First and Second Respondent, but other orders were made as set out below on specific disclosure.

Order to Disclose Company Accounts

97. I proceeded to make the Orders as set out below to ensure that both parties were ready for the adjourned Hearing on 23 to the 25 October 2023, and the hearing then concluded. In particular I ordered that;

3. Disclosure

3.1 By 28 September 2023, the Respondents will send to the Claimant and the Tribunal the following documents: -
3.1.1 A copy of the P45 and P60 for the Claimants employment with the First Respondents.
3.1.2 A copy of the P60 for the Claimants employment with the First Respondents. [ Note this should have been a reference to the Second Respondent].
3.1.3 A copy of the full company accounts of the First and the Second Respondents for their financial year ending in April 2022, and for the avoidance of doubt any such accounts prepared and filed by the Respondents during the Claimants last year of employment with both the First and Second Respondents. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.
3.1.4 The First and Second Respondent shall by the 28 September 2023 disclose to the Claimant all her requests for annual leave made during her employment with them. Hearing on the 22 and 23 October 2023 (“Second Hearing”) Breach of Tribunal Orders

98. At the outset of the Second Hearing, we were advised by Mr Hoyle that the First and Second Respondent would not comply with Order 3.1.3 made by the this Tribunal (in paragraph 97 above) to disclose the accounts of the First and Second Respondent. He said they refused to do so on the grounds that the company accounts were “confidential.”

99. We were surprised and disappointed that the First and Second Respondent decided to breach the order of this Tribunal.

100. In the event the only order complied with was order 3.1.1. and 3.1.2 above and order 3.1.4 was also not complied with. No explanation was given about that non-compliance. Application for this Tribunal to Recuse itself on the grounds of Apparent Bias

101. At the outset of this Second Hearing, Mr Hoyle told us that he had some ‘house-keeping matters to raise,’ and then referred to an Appeal that had been lodged with the Employment Appeal Tribunal the previous day on 22 October 2023. He referred to a first instance case which he gave to this Tribunal. He said that case referred to helpful Authorities on the issue of apparent bias. We read the first instance case, but we were not bound by this first instance case in any event.

102. Mr Hoyle reminded us that at the previous Hearing, I, the Employment Judge of this Tribunal, had used the word “oppressive” when I spoke to him during the part of the Hearing where the Claimant was responding to his Application for specific disclosure.

103. In essence, Mr Hoyle accused this Tribunal of bias, i.e., the way I, as the Judge, on behalf of this Tribunal conducted myself in the way I spoke to him, was a form of bias; or at least created the risk of a perception of apparent bias.

104. As set out above during that Application by the Respondents for specific disclosure, it was not in dispute that I intervened and said to Mr Hoyle that I thought he was being oppressive to the witness. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

105. This exchange, between myself and Mr Hoyle, was set out in my written Reasons of my Case Management Order sent at the request of Mr Hoyle. In particular, at paragraph 52 onwards of my decision, I set out what the issue was, what Mr Hoyle said and what I said to Mr Hoyle. In relation to that exchange between myself and Mr Hoyle at the Hearing, Mr Hoyle submitted that this was sufficient to create the impression in the mind of a fair minded and reasonable observer that there was a risk of and a real possibility of bias. Mr Hoyle quite rightly pointed out that bias does not need to be proved, simply that there has to be an appearance of or a risk of an appearance of bias.

106. We retired to consider the application and we considered the legal authorities on this point.

107. The case of Porter v Magill [2002], establishes the test for apparent bias which is a two-stage process. The two-stage test that we must follow is the suggestion that the Court must first ascertain all the circumstances which have a bearing on the suggestion that the Judge was biased. It must then ask whether those circumstances would lead a fair minded and informed observer to conclude that there was a real possibility that the Judge was biased.

108. Bias means a prejudice against one party or its case for reasons unconnected to the legal or factual merits of the case. It goes on to say that if the test of apparent bias is satisfied, the Judge is automatically disqualified from hearing the case and considerations of inconvenience, costs and delay are irrelevant as set out in Man O’War Station Limited v Auckland City Council [2002].

109. Having considered the matter in detail we rejected the application for this Tribunal to recuse itself on the grounds of a risk of apparent bias.

110. In essence, Mr Hoyle accused this Tribunal of conduct bias, i.e., that the way I, as the Judge, on behalf of this Tribunal conducted myself in the way I spoke to him, was a form of bias; or at least created the perception of apparent bias.

111. Case Law has established that trained legal representatives (it does not define whether that means Solicitor, Barrister or just an experienced Advocate such as Mr Hoyle) will largely be expected to take conduct by a Tribunal in their stride. For example, in Bird v Sylvester EAT0037/06, the Employment Appeal Tribunal held that the Tribunal Chairman, as they were then known, telling a Solicitor to “get on with it” did not even arguably taint the fairness of the Hearing. The comment was made to the Claimant’s Solicitor during a break in hearing the Claimant’s evidence.

112. Another example which we think is on all fours with this case, is the case of Kidd v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis EAT0191/17. During the Hearing KS’s Barrister made an allegation of professional misconduct against her opponent. The Employment Judge invited ‘KS’, as she is known in this Case Number: - 3310860/2022. case, to withdraw the allegation and apologise. He then raised his voice and cut short her explanation asking, “…have you learned your lesson?”, adding “…don’t you tell us how to do our job”.

113. The EAT said, in their view, the Judge could not be criticised for forming a dim view of her conduct of the case and that although he may have gone a little over the top in his criticisms, hostilities towards an Advocate were not to be equated with hostility towards a party. Finding against a Claimant, expressing views in robust terms and being exasperated by the process did not necessarily indicate apparent bias, and viewing the events in context the EAT considered that a fair minded and properly informed observer would not have thought that there was a real possibility of bias.

114. It is not disputed that I said to Mr Hoyle that I thought he was being “oppressive” towards the witness, and I said that in the context of what he had said about her demeanour during the specific disclosure Application. I later clarified to him that I had not called him an oppressive Advocate generally, but it was in the context of that Application.

115. Whilst Mr Hoyle may have taken great offence at this, my criticism of him as an Advocate is not to be equated with hostility by this Tribunal towards his client, the First and Second Respondent, in accordance with the case of Kidd. In our view, Mr Hoyle’s Application for this Tribunal to recuse itself had to fail because the matter he complained of was my criticism of him, and not of his client, the Respondents in this case.

116. In reaching this decision we also reminded ourselves of Automobile Pty Ltd

v. Healy [1979] I.C.R. 809, which stated that an Employment Tribunal was not entitled to withdraw from a case simply because one of the parties alleged a lack of confidence in it during the Hearing.

117. This Tribunal unanimously concluded that there was no risk in this case and in the circumstances of this case that would lead a fair minded and informed observer to conclude that there was a real possibility of bias, in that I, as the Judge of this Tribunal, was biased when telling Mr Hoyle, I thought he was being oppressive to the Claimant.

118. We concluded that my criticism of Mr Hoyle had been confused in the application for recusal with perceived apparent bias towards the Respondent for which there was no evidence and for that reason, the Application for Recusal on the grounds of apparent bias was rejected.

Application to amend the Response

119. On the first day of the part-heard hearing, the issue of the Tidy Email was revisited by this Tribunal, and the email and its contents was considered by us prior to the hearing starting. Under my case management powers, and under Rule 29, we considered again the issue of whether the Respondents could re- Case Number: - 3310860/2022. open the issue of the admission made in the Tidy Email and the concession made that the two Respondents were associated employers.

120. Having considered that there was a clear concession in the Tidy Email we concluded that in order for the Respondents to try and re-open this issue they would have to apply to amend their Responses to re-introduce this part of their defence, and if such an amendment was allowed then any submissions on this point would be heard during closing submissions. It was notable that no evidence about this issue was contained in the witness statement of the Respondents.

121. When the hearing commenced, I pointed out to Mr Hoyle that on the issue of opening up again the issue of whether the First and Second Respondent were associated employers, as conceded in the Tidy Email, that he would have to apply to amend the Responses to re-introduce this issue. We invited both parties to address us on the issue. Application to amend the Response of the First and Second Respondent

122. An application to amend the response of both Respondents was then made by Mr Hoyle. In relation to the submissions by Mr Hoyle on why the Respondents should be allowed to amend their Response and why we should allow them to resile from the admission in the Tidy Email, we were simply told by Mr Hoyle that he had now taken the case over from Mr Tidy. He then made submissions on the merits of the legal issue itself.

123. The Claimant submitted that they should not be allowed to resile from their previous admission. The Claimant said the prejudice to her was greater as she now had to prove something she did not previously have to prove.

Rejection of application to Amend

124. We retired to consider this issue. We did not regard a change in fee earner as something that was in any way significant for the Respondents amendment application. It is of course very common and routine for the advocate for a party to change during the proceedings in the Tribunal. On this occasion the same organisation still represented the Respondents, this being Croner Law.

125. In considering the amendment application, we considered that if we refused the Respondents application to amend, they would be unable to argue that the Claimant lacked continuous service of over two years for her unfair dismissal claim, but we also considered that the prejudice to them had been caused by their own actions in making a clear concession after receiving legal advice. Considering the law on where the balance of prejudice lay, in our view it clearly lay with the Claimant who would have a further legal issue that she must prove were we to allow the amendment. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

126. We had regard to the circumstances of this case and the injustice and hardship that may be caused to either of the parties and in particular the case law referred to above in the context of the previous amendment applications.

127. In Cocking v Sandhurst (Stationers) Ltd and anor 1974 ICR 650, NIRC it was established that we must have regard to all the circumstances of the case. Part of the circumstances of this case were that the Respondent conceded a legal point after taking legal advice and then made an application to re- introduce at the final hearing it with no substantive reason given.

128. It was striking that on the one hand the Respondents wished to reintroduce this part of their defence, but on the other hand had not complied with a court order to disclose documents that were highly relevant to this issue, i.e. the company accounts of both Respondents which would have shown who was in control of the First and Second Respondents, something that would have assisted us in determining the point of associated employers under s.231 of the ERA 1996.

129. Having balanced the hardship and prejudice between the parties, and having regard to where that greater hardship lay, we concluded that it lay with the Claimant and so the application to amend this part of the Respondents Response was therefore refused and the concession in the Tidy email that the First and Second Respondents were associated employers pursuant to s.231 of the ERA 1996 therefore stood. Fifth and Sixth Application to postpone the Second Adjourned Hearing

Fifth postponement application

130. By email to the Tribunal on the 18 October 2023 the Respondents made an Application for Postponement of the part-heard Hearing which was to commence on 23 October 2023 (“Fifth Postponement Application”). The

application stated as follows: -

Dear Sirs

I write with regard to the above hearing which is due to recommence on Monday 23rd October. Upon request of the respondent, written reasons for a decision made at the previous, part heard hearing were handed down to parties on the 12th September. My client instructs me that they wish to appeal the decision of the previous Tribunal. The last day in which they can do so is Tuesday 24th which is day 2 of the reconvened hearing. Case Number: - 3310860/2022. The appeal shall be drafted and sent to the Employment Appeal Tribunal within the 42-day timeframe, and our attention must now focus on the drafting and filing of that appeal. We therefore respectfully ask that this matter is referred to the duty judge or legal officer at the earliest convenience so that the matter can be adjourned pending a decision from the Employment Appeal Tribunal.

Yours Sincerely

Simon J Hoyle

131. The basis of this Application was simply that they were lodging an Appeal against the ‘the decision of the previous Tribunal’ but no details were given as to what part of this Tribunals previous case management orders they were appealing, and at this point the only decisions made were in relation to four postponement applications, and two disclosure applications. It was notable that this Fifth Application was made five days before the Hearing was to take place and no explanation was given as to why they had to leave the preparation of any Appeal to the EAT until just five days prior to this Hearing.

132. We refused this Fifth Application for Postponement prior to the part-heard hearing on the 23 October 2023. Rule 30 (a) states as follows: 30A.— (1) An application by a party for the postponement of a hearing shall be presented to the Tribunal and communicated to the other parties as soon as possible after the need for a postponement becomes known.

(2) Where a party makes an application for a postponement of a hearing less than 7 days before the date on which the hearing begins, the Tribunal may only order the postponement where— (a)all other parties’ consent to the postponement and— (i)it is practicable and appropriate for the purposes of giving the parties the opportunity to resolve their disputes by agreement; or (ii)it is otherwise in accordance with the overriding objective; (b)the application was necessitated by an act or omission of another party or the Tribunal; or (c)there are exceptional circumstances.

133. In accordance with Rule 30(A) applications made for postponements of hearings, less than seven days prior to a hearing, can only be granted in exceptional circumstances, or where consented to by all parties, and a stated intention to lodge an appeal against case management orders did not fall within the definition of ‘exceptional circumstances.’ Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

Sixth Postponement Application

134. On 23 October 2023, the Respondents then made another Application for Postponement of this Second Hearing (“Sixth Postponement Application”). This time it was premised on the fact that Mr Refugio, against whom many of the allegations were made, and who was present at the adjourned hearing, had to leave the Hearing no later than around 12.45pm to catch an aeroplane to Dubai due to his business interests.

135. By way of background, at the First Hearing Mr Refugio had not been present, and this was stated to be due to the fact that he was in Dubai. Mr Hoyle asked me about the attendance of Mr Refugio at the next Hearing and the issue of him giving evidence from abroad, which was from Dubai, part of the United Arab Emirates. I stated that Mr Hoyle would need to write to the Tribunal to make this request and the usual procedures would then be followed.

136. When Mr Hoyle made this Sixth Postponement Application on the morning of the Second Hearing, he had not taken any steps to write to the Tribunal to try and arrange for Mr Refugio to give evidence from Dubai. There was no dispute that Mr Hoyle on behalf of the Respondent, had failed to take any steps to write to the Tribunal so that the Taking of Evidence Unit could be contacted.

137. In any event, I also noted that the United Arab Emirates is not a jurisdiction with whom the UK has a standing arrangement for the giving of evidence from abroad.

138. The Respondents, therefore, despite knowing for three months about this re-listed Hearing, took no steps whatsoever to write to the Tribunal to deal with Mr Refugio giving evidence from Dubai. We found it remarkable that he was able to be present on the morning of the 23 October 2023, and despite being able to arrange to be present on 23 October 2023 we were not warned at the outset of the hearing at 10.00 am by Mr Hoyle that Mr Refugio would have to leave the Hearing at around 12.45pm that day.

139. Instead, what happened was this Tribunal dealt with, and refused, a Recusal Application of this Tribunal on the grounds of apparent bias. We then went on to deal with an Amendment Application to the Respondent’s defence. Those two Applications took nearly two hours on the morning of the Hearing on the 23 October 2023, with no mention being made of Mr Refugio having to leave by lunchtime that day.

140. By the time we had delivered our oral decisions on both the Recusal Application and the Amendment Application, at around 12.15 am Mr Hoyle made the Sixth Postponement Application and he said that Mr Refugio had to leave to catch a plane by no later than 12.45 am. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

141. Mr Hoyle, rather unusually, therefore then went to ask that if the Sixth Postponement Application was to be refused, that his client Mr Refugio be sworn into the Witness Box simply to take the Oath, and so that he could state that his Witness Statement was true to the best of his knowledge, information and belief. This was a highly unusual request as it was made quite clear that he would then immediately be asked to be released from the Witness Box so that he could leave the Hearing.

142. We retired but then refused the Sixth Application for Postponement. Mr Refugio had been aware for over three months about this Hearing and in the view of this Tribunal he could easily have arranged not to have to fly to Dubai until the Hearing had concluded. No specific evidence was put to us as to why that had not been possible. However, we granted this request as it made no particular difference either way, as it was a matter for this Tribunal whether or not to attach weight to Mr Refugio’s witness statement on which he was not cross examined due to leaving the hearing early.

143. After refusing the Sixth Application for Postponement, and after Mr Refugio took the Oath and confirmed his Witness Statement was true to the best of his knowledge, information, and belief, he left the Second Hearing at around 12.45pm.

144. We note at this point that during the First and Second Hearing there were no less than nine preliminary Applications by the Respondent, six were for postponements of the Hearing, one for specific disclosure, one for recusal, and one for amendment of the defence. This Tribunal’s time was taken up equally with preliminary Applications by the Respondent as it was hearing evidence.

Findings of Fact

145. From the information and evidence before me, we made the following findings of fact. We made our findings of fact on the balance of probabilities, considering all of the evidence, both documentary and oral, which was admitted at the Hearing. We do not set out in this Judgment all of the evidence which we heard, but only our principal findings of fact and those necessary to enable us to reach conclusions on the issues to be decided.

146. Where it was necessary to resolve conflicting factual accounts, we have done so by making a judgement about the credibility or otherwise of the witnesses we heard, based upon their overall consistency and the consistency of the accounts given on different occasions and set against any contemporaneous documents. We have not referred to every document we read or were directed to or taken to in the findings below, however, that does not mean they were not considered.

Background

Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

147. By the time of the Claimant’s dismissal on 9 March 2022, the Claimant had been employed by the First, and latterly the Second Respondent, for three years. In her witness statement she referred to being employed by Immigration and Nationality Services Limited, the First Respondent as a Business Development Manager and that her employment commenced with them on 4 February 2018 (Paragraph 1 of WS). There was initial confusion caused about this date when we reached our decision as the ET1 Claim Form referred to a commencement date of 4 February 2019. That was also the date carried over into the Claimant’s Schedule of Loss (page 40 and 41). Her submissions also referred to her employment commencing on the 4 February 2019, and the Statement of Particulars of Employment was also dated the 4 February 2019, and so we found that her employment commenced on the 4 February 2019 and that she had continuous service of over three years at the date of dismissal on the 9 March 2022.

Continuous Employment with the First and Second Respondents

148. The Statement of Particulars of Employment issued by the First Respondent referred to a contractual notice period of four weeks in favour of the Claimant in her employment with the First Respondent. When the Claimant’s employment commenced with the Second Respondent on the 24 January 2022 no contract of employment was issued by the Second Respondent, or a replacement Statement of Particulars of Employment.

149. Following the commencement of the Claimant’s employment with the First Respondent on 4 February 2019, the Claimant carried out her work as Business Development Manager for the First Respondent. We found that although the offer letter was from the First Respondent the Claimant was being trained by Ms Maryam Sufi, an Immigration Solicitor employed at the Second Respondent, and the Claimant’s day to day role involved handling all Immigration case work for the Second Respondent which included engaging, advising clients and assisting senior solicitors with case work for the Second Respondent. We found the reason for this unusual arrangement was that her Visa issued in 2019 only permitted her to be employed by the First Respondent.

150. The Claimant had qualified as a Solicitor in India, and while working for the First Respondent we found that she took, and passed the appropriate qualifications in the United Kingdom to qualify as a Solicitor and that this was entirely funded by herself.

151. Upon qualifying as a Solicitor, we found that the Second Respondent then obtained a sponsor license, and that the Claimant’s work visa was then extended on the 23 January 2022 by the Second Respondent, and she was then employed by the Second Respondent as a newly qualified Solicitor from the 24 January 2022 onwards. The Certificate of Sponsorship set out a start date of the 24 January 2022 which was to expire on the 23 January 2024 [page 58 of the bundle]. Case Number: - 3310860/2022.

152. We found that when her employment with the Second Respondent commenced on the 24 January 2022, the Claimant’s contract of employment with the First Respondent was therefore varied so that she became employed by the Second Respondent, and the terms of her employment, save for an increased salary, remained the same.

153. In the alternative, when the Claimant commenced her employment with the Second Respondent, we find that the Claimant was employed on the same terms of employment to those she was employed on by the First Respondent, as no reference was made by either party to new terms of employment applying to her employment with the Second Respondent.

154. We found that on the issue of whether the First and Second Respondents were associated employers, as defined in s.231 of the Employment Rights Act 1996, this was conceded by the Respondent in the Tidy Email and therefore the Claimant had continuous employment from 04 February 2019 until the 09 March 2022 of three years. This also established that the Claimant held the qualifying period of employment as required in Section 108(1) of the Employment Rights Act 1996 for an unfair dismissal claim.

155. In relation to her continuous employment, and in any event, even had this issue not been conceded in the Tidy email, it was not in dispute that Mr Ian Refugio was the owner of both the First and Second Respondent and as a finding of fact we found that he, as a third party, had control of both the First and Second Respondent as he was the owner of both firms for the purposes of s.231 of the Employment Rights Act 1996. The following was said in the Response of both the First and Second Respondent: - “Both Respondents 1 and 2 are owned by Mr Ian Refugio, whilst Mrs. Germin Mohamed is a joint Director with Ian Refugio for Respondent 2.”

Dismissal of other employees

156. The Claimant asserted in paragraph 3 of her Witness Statement that the First and Second Respondent, which she referred to as “IANS Group”, had several unfair business practices that were indirectly discriminatory towards internationally sponsored migrants. This of course mirrored the reference to indirect discrimination in the Case Management Summary.

157. We also heard evidence from the witnesses at the hearing on behalf of the Claimant about the same type of treatment of them by the First Respondent. This was background information about the business practices of the First Respondent, and the Second Respondent, and how, Mr Refugio treated his employees.

158. The evidence of the witnesses to this Tribunal, and in particular, Mr Kurotimi