RESERVED JUDGMENT

1. The complaint of victimisation is dismissed upon withdrawal.

2. The claimant was not an employee of the respondent within the meaning of section 230 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 at the relevant time. The complaint of constructive dismissal is therefore dismissed because the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear it.

3. The claimant was a worker within the meaning of section 230 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 at the relevant time.

4. The complaint of unauthorised deductions from wages is not well-founded and is dismissed.

5. The complaint in respect of holiday pay is well-founded. The respondent failed to pay the claimant in accordance with regulation 14(2) and/or 16(1) of the Working Time Regulations 1998.

6. The respondent shall pay the claimant £4,775.92. The claimant is responsible for paying any tax or National Insurance.

7. The claimant was an employee within the meaning of section 83 of the Equality Act 2010 at the relevant time.

8. The alleged discriminatory acts which occurred prior to 7 June 2023 are not part of a continuing course of conduct over a period which ended after 7 June 2023 and it is not just and equitable to extend time. The claim is therefore dismissed in relation to those alleged discriminatory acts.

9. The remaining complaints of sexual harassment are not well-founded and are dismissed.

REASONS

INTRODUCTION AND CLAIM

1. The claimant’s engagement with the respondent commenced on 1 September 2022 and ended on 30 June 2023. After a period of early conciliation between 6 September 2023 and 18 October 2023, the claimant presented her claim form (with accompanying annex) on 14 November 2023. By way of her claim form, the claimant raised complaints of harassment, victimisation and alleged she was owed notice pay, holiday pay, arrears of pay and other payments.

2. The claimant was a saleswoman for the respondent, a double-glazing and home improvement company, and was responsible for visiting ‘leads’ (persons who had expressed an interest in double-glazing or home improvements) and seeking to confirm contracts. The claimant contends that she was an employee and was constructively dismissed by the respondent accepting their fundamental breach of contract by resigning. The respondent maintains that the claimant was a self-employed contractor and was neither an employee nor a worker and as such the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to entertain her claims.

HEARING

3. The hearing was a fully remote hearing by cloud video platform. Neither party objected to the hearing proceeding in this format. There were no material connection difficulties experienced during the hearing and the hearing proceeded effectively as a remote hearing.

4. In advance of the hearing, I was provided with a hearing bundle in two parts being a pdf of 89 pages and a pdf of 84 pages containing the claim form, response form, witness statements and documents related to the claimant’s employment. At the start of the hearing, I was informed that there was a single pdf hearing bundle of 176 pages which included the claimant’s witness statements and exhibits. It transpired that Claimant’s Counsel had prepared on the basis of the two part bundle. Many of the pages in the 176 page bundle were feint font and difficult to read. In these circumstances references to the hearing bundle (HB) are to the manuscript page numbers on the pdf bundles used by the parties for consistency of reference.

5. The two part bundle contained an unsigned witness statement dated 5 September 2024 of Michael Ashley which had been served on and was understood by the Claimant to be Michael Ashley’s statement for the hearing. However, the 176 page pdf contained a different signed statement of Michael Ashley dated 9 October 2024. Respondent’s Counsel told the tribunal that the statement dated 9 October 2024 had been served on the claimant by way of service of the 176 page bundle although the inclusion of this statement had not been highlighted to the claimant when this bundle was sent. Claimant’s Counsel was pragmatic and did not contest service of the later statement of Michael Ashley although time necessarily had to be taken to ascertain the differences between the statements served by Michael Ashley in order that Claimant’s Counsel could prepare and adapt cross-examination.

6. The 176 page pdf also contained a statement of an Iain Lewis dated 1 October 2024 which had not been served previously to provision of that bundle. Claimant’s Counsel was not expecting this witness to be called and was not aware of the statement prior to the hearing nor was the witness referred to in a draft timetable prepared by the parties. Whilst Claimant’s Counsel not unreasonably objected to calling Iain Lewis, in the event Mr Lewis was called and it was possible to accommodate this and for Claimant’s Counsel to be in a position to address that witness. Mr Hoar’s flexibility and pragmatism is noted in this regard.

7. I had an unsigned written statement from the Claimant understood to have been served on or around 20 September 2024. In all the circumstances, the respondent did not object to the form of this statement and flexibility was exercised in this regard. I observe that the claimant was acting as a litigant in person when she served her statement although she did have legal representation earlier in the proceedings. For the respondent, there were signed written statements from Mark Pywell (Regional Sales Director) dated 5 September 2024, Michael Ashley (Claimant’s manager) dated 9 October 2024, Filipe Goncalves (Assistant Manager) dated 5 September 2024, Nimesh Patel (King’s Lynn Branch Manager) dated 5 September 2024 and Iain Lewis dated 1 October 2024.

8. The claimant also affirmed with an oral statement of truth a document referred to as a remedies statement dated 18 June 2024.

9. I heard evidence from the claimant and the respondent’s witnesses.

10. I heard submissions from Mr Hoar on behalf of the claimant and from Mr Burrows on behalf of the respondent. The claimant also provided an opening statement document.

11. At the start of the hearing, the respondent withdrew an application for strike out of the claimant’s witness statement on the basis she had served it one week after the initial tribunal deadline.

12. On day one of the hearing, I heard an application for anonymisation from the claimant and gave oral decision and reasons refusing the application. At the end of day one of the hearing, the claimant withdrew her victimisation complaint and accordingly it was dismissed upon withdrawal.

13. On day two and three I heard evidence. The tribunal sat late on both day two and three to accommodate respondent witness availability and in order to hear the evidence.

14. I heard submissions on day four. I started deliberations on the afternoon of day four but there was insufficient time in the timetable to deliver any decision and accordingly, I reserved my decision.

ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION

Preliminary issue – application for an anonymisation order

15. EJ Warren directed that the claimant’s application for anonymisation of her identity be considered at the outset of the final hearing.

16. I considered the claimant’s written application, respondent’s written reply and the oral submissions of the parties and case law they referred me to. I gave oral decision with reasons refusing to make any anonymisation order and it is convenient to record those reasons here.

17. The claimant applied for an order pursuant to rule 49(3)(b) of the Employment Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 which provides: “that the identities of specified parties, witnesses or other persons referred to in the proceedings should not be disclosed to the public, by the use of anonymisation or otherwise, whether in the course of any hearing or in its listing or in any documents entered on the Register or otherwise forming part of the public record; not applying for hearing to be held in private.”

18. The claimant also applied on the basis of entitlement under section 1 of the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1992 (SOAA) on the basis that the claimant is entitled to such an order to apply for her lifetime having raised two allegations said to qualify being (i) an allegation of sexual assault against a customer of the respondent; and (ii) allegations of sexual harassment by employees of the respondent.

19. Section 11(1)(b) of the Employment Tribunals Act 1996 sets out that procedure rules may include provision: “for cases involving allegations of sexual misconduct, enabling an Employment Tribunal on the application of any party to proceedings before it or of its own motion, to make a restricted reporting order having effect (if not revoked earlier) until the promulgation of the decision of the tribunal.”

20. The Claimant relies on an allegation which is set out in the Claimant’s written application at paragraph 5 taken from her witness statement: “The matter can be and is put shortly. The Claimant alleges she was subjected to a sexual assault by a customer on 15th June 2023. The allegation is that, on that date: …I attended an appointment with a single male occupant. Upon arrival the customer tried to grab me by the shoulders and kiss me, making me feel massively uncomfortable. Throughout the initial part of the appointment, the customer repeatedly threw his bank card at me, stating he wanted to sign a contract. The customer also asked at one point for me to expose my breasts, as well as repeatedly asking me out on a date. (Witness Statement of the Claimant, Hearing Bundle p 145).”

21. The claimant relied on authority including that in A v X [2019] IRLR 620, Soole J in the EAT concluded the SOAA 1992 applied where there was no allegation in a criminal context. The respondent relies on the more recent authority of Ajao v Commerzbank [2024] EAT 11 and that Kerr J concluded in that case that: “an "allegation" in section 1(1) of the SOAA refers to a formal allegation, which does not need to be made by the victim, [but] made in the context of potential criminal proceedings, where a criminal charge may be brought. It does not include, without more, an allegation made in civil, family or tribunal proceedings of conduct that, if committed, would be one of the sexual offences covered by the SOAA. There was no suggestion in that case that the claimant (or anyone else) had ever made a formal allegation against the respondent of a sexual offence committed in the context of the criminal law.”

22. Taking account of that recent authority and the circumstances put forwards by the claimant, I have concluded that the claimant is not entitled to the protection of section 1 of the SOAA 1992. There is no evidence, information or indication before me that the claimant has made any form of formal allegation in the criminal law context or raised the allegation other than in the context of these proceedings.

23. I turned to conduct a balancing exercise in order to weigh the competing rights concerned to consider whether any anonymisation order was required to protect the claimant’s privacy given her allegations of sexual misconduct and private information.

24. I give full weight to open justice and Article 10 (Freedom of expression) of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR); freedom of expression is an inseparable part of the open justice principle. Open justice is a fundamental principle and the general rule is public hearings and decisions; identity /names are not irrelevant matters in this context. Any derogation is exceptional and the burden of establishing any derogation is on the person seeking the derogation and this must be done with clear and cogent evidence and when strictly necessary to secure the proper administration of justice. I was mindful that whether or not to derogate is not an exercise of a discretion on my part but that either grounds exist for the exceptional derogation or they do not. Any derogation must be necessary in the interests of justice.

25. Article 6 (Right to a fair trial) ECHR has relevance as it is the right for everyone to have a fair and public hearing with judgment pronounced publicly i.e. both the appellant and the respondent have that right subject to qualifications as provided for within article 6(1) including where in the interests of morals or protection of private life.

26. The claimant relies on Article 8 (Right to respect for private and family life) ECHR and in particular privacy. The claimant placed emphasis on reference to miscarriages and referred to prejudice in terms of panic attacks arising further to the alleged treatment suffered. There is no requirement for any supporting or corroborative documentary evidence but I noted that there was no medical evidence provided to support this harm or any particular detailed evidence. The claimant indicated that if anonymisation of identity as requested was not ordered, she would proceed with the hearing. In these circumstances, it was not entirely clear what was necessary and in the interests of justice about the anonymisation.

27. I noted that the case law in this area is clearly fact specific as to the particular article 8 factual matrices considered that either have or have not been found to warrant anonymisation of identity or other forms of restriction on publicity but is overall indicative of an approach which underlines the paramount importance of open justice and the limited and exceptional basis on which derogation is permissible. I considered a range of relevant factors.

28. I noted the relevance of the restrictions requested by the claimant and that these were not total in the sense that she did not request that the hearing be held in private but requested that her identity be anonymised in all documents including the decision which will go on the public register; non-parties to be prohibited from inspecting the register.

29. I noted that overall in light of the timing and the consideration of the application at this hearing there was no advance notice to third parties but that rule 49(4) allowed for others such as the press to apply to lift any order where there has been no reasonable opportunity to make representations before any order is made.

30. I considered that the allegations concerned sexual misconduct although I had concluded that the claimant did not have any right to anonymity in all the circumstances. I considered the nature of the allegations and the private information that the claimant sought to protect.

31. I considered the evidence available as to prejudice and whether it was cogent evidence that justice cannot be done without some restriction on publicity. I was not persuaded by the submission in relation to this. I acknowledged sensitive information with regard to miscarriages and that the case concerns allegations of sexual harassment but there was no real evidence of impact and prejudice or stigma around these matters before me other than the oral evidence which was not particularly detailed on these aspects. I am not clear why the claimant’s identity remaining thwarts justice being done in her case. Whilst I acknowledge that she was not aware of the range of orders/applications she may make in this regard there is no indication that she was hesitant about raising her allegations through tribunal proceedings until very recently.

32. I considered that any such order was exceptional and that ordinarily embarrassment does not suffice and considered that any discomfort or even a degree of distress as regards ventilating certain matters will not suffice acknowledging that the claimant would prefer to retain privacy over information in particular regarding miscarriages.

33. Balancing what is requested against the open justice principle and giving full regard and weight to that and Article 10 against the Article 8 rights as identified and all the circumstances, I concluded that it is not necessary in the interests of justice to anonymise the claimant’s identity and that those private life features relied upon do not outweigh open justice.

Substantive issues for determination

34. The substantive issues for determination are set out in the record of a case management hearing of 5 July 2024 before EJ Graham and were agreed between the parties prior to the hearing. As set out above, the claimant has withdrawn her complaint of victimisation.

35. The claimant brings complaints of constructive dismissal, sexual harassment, harassment related to sex, holiday pay and unauthorised deductions from wages. The respondent maintains that the claimant was self-employed and thus not entitled to bring any of her complaints whereas the claimant contends that she was an employee and/or worker of the respondent. The issues for determination are as follows:

Employment Status

36. Was the Claimant an employee of the Respondent within the meaning of section 230 of the Employment Rights Act 1996?

37. Was the Claimant an employee of the Respondent within the meaning of section 83 of the Equality Act 2010?

38. Was the Claimant a worker of the Respondent within the meaning of the section 230 of the Employment Rights Act 1996?

Time Limits

39. Given the date the claim form was presented and the dates of early conciliation, any complaint about something that happened before 7 June 2023 may not have been brought in time.

40. Were the discrimination complaints made within the time limit in section 123 of the Equality Act 2010? The Tribunal will decide:

40.1 Was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the act to which the complaint relates?
40.2 If not, was there conduct extending over a period?
40.3 If so, was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the end of that period?
40.4 If not, were the claims made within a further period that the Tribunal thinks is just and equitable? The Tribunal will decide:
40.4.1 Why were the complaints not made to the Tribunal in time?
40.4.2 In any event, is it just and equitable in all the circumstances to extend time?

41. Was the unauthorised deductions complaint made within the time limit in section 23 of the Employment Rights Act 1996? The Tribunal will decide:

41.1 Was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the effective date of payment of wages from which the deduction was made?
41.2 If not, was there a series of deductions and was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the last one?
41.3 If it was not reasonably practicable for the claim to be made to the Tribunal within the time limit, was it made within a reasonable period?

42. Was the claim for unpaid accrued holiday pay (Regulation 14) made within the time limit in Regulation 30(2) Working Time Regulations 1998?

42.1 Was the claim made to the Tribunal within three months (plus early conciliation extension) of the date of payment of the wages from which the deduction was made?
42.2 If not, was it reasonably practicable for the claim to be made to the Tribunal within the time limit?
42.3 If it was not reasonably practicable for the claim to be made to the Tribunal within the time limit, was it made within a reasonable period? Constructive dismissal

43. If the claimant was an employee, was she dismissed?

43.1 Did the Respondent do the following things:
43.1.1 In or around June 2023, removing the Claimant from her sale position and asking her to work in the call centre; and
43.1.2 All of the acts of harassment set out below.
43.2 Did that breach the implied term of trust and confidence? The Tribunal will need to decide:
43.2.1 Whether the Respondent behaved in a way that was calculated or likely to destroy or seriously damage the trust and confidence between the Claimant and the Respondent; and
43.2.2 Whether it had reasonably and proper cause for doing so.
43.3 Did the Claimant resign in response to the breach? The Tribunal will need to decide whether the breach of contract was a reason for the Claimant’s resignation.
43.4 Did the Claimant affirm the contract before resigning? The Tribunal will need to decide whether the Claimant’s words or actions showed that they chose to keep the contract alive even after the breach. Remedy for constructive dismissal

44. If the claimant was an employee, and if she was constructively dismissed, what was the Claimant’s notice period? The Claimant agrees that it is one week.

45. Was the Claimant paid for that notice period?

46. If not, what damages is the Claimant entitled to?

Sexual harassment

47. Did the Respondent do the following things:

47.1 Filipe Goncalves (assistant sales and training manager) and other colleagues (including Matty) placed a wager who would sleep with the Claimant first. The Claimant says she was told about this by a colleague named Ian.
47.2 Regular comments about the Claimant's appearance, outfits she wore to work, including from Filipe Goncalves "It's hard not to look at your arse when your skirt falls in all the right places" as well as comments about the Claimant's bottom and how well her clothes would show off her figure. These comments were made twice a week on average.
47.3 Filipe Goncalves would often ask the Claimant about her sex life with her boyfriend and would often make crude jokes about the same — these comments were made after she started her engagement with the Respondent and were made several times a month.
47.4 Frequently telling the Claimant to take advantage of being female and actively encouraged her to flaunt herself and flirt with male customers she would visit in order to secure more sales. The comments were made by Filipe Goncalves and Michael Ashley (sale manager) consistently throughout her engagement.
47.5 Informing the Claimant on multiple occasions that the reason for her hire was because she would not intimidate elderly customers like male colleagues would and that she could flirt and seduce male customers in order to gain more sales. The Claimant says that this was said within two to three months of starting her engagement and the comments were made by Ian and Filipe Goncalves.
47.6 On 16 June 2023 the Claimant informed the Respondent of an incident the day before where she had attended a customer's home and he had tried to grab her and kiss her, asked her to expose her breasts and to go on a date with him, and tried to get her to go into the loft. The Claimant says she informed her employer as she was shaken and deeply upset however Filipe Goncalves found it amusing and told the Claimant that she should have exposed her breasts and that he would send her back out to secure more deals. The Claimant says that the comment was made in front of multiple co-workers.
47.7 On 21 June 2023, after being informed that the customer referred to at 47.6 above had cancelled his order, the Respondent required the Claimant to return to his house with Filipe Goncalves to speak to the customer. Following the discussion with the customer, the Claimant was in the car with Filipe Goncalves and he reprimanded her for the cancellation, told her that she was incapable of doing her job, and that she should have slept with the customer if necessary to secure a sale. The Claimant says that this caused her to suffer a panic attack and left her unable to drive home.

48. If so, was that unwanted conduct?

49. Was it of a sexual nature?

50. Did the conduct have the purpose of violating the Claimant’s dignity or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the Claimant?

51. If not, did it have that effect? The Tribunal will take into account the Claimant’s perception, the other circumstances of the case and whether it is reasonable for the conduct to have that effect.

Harassment related to sex (section 26(1))

52. Did the respondent do the following thing:

52.1 On 16 March 2023 the Claimant informed the Respondent that she had sadly suffered a miscarriage of twins 9 months prior. The Claimant says that Filipe Goncalves informed her that it was really a blessing as he believed that she did not want children yet and would not have been able to cope, and he likened the miscarriage to when he was unable to see his children for six weeks following a divorce.

53. If so, was that unwanted conduct?

54. Did it relate to sex?

55. Did the conduct have the purpose or effect of violating the Claimant’s dignity or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for the claimant?

56. If not, did it have that effect? The Tribunal will take into account the Claimant’s perception, the other circumstances of the case and whether it is reasonable for the conduct to have that effect.

Remedy for discrimination

57. What financial losses has the discrimination caused the Claimant?

58. Has the Claimant taken reasonable steps to replace lost earnings, for example by looking for another job?

59. If not, for what period of loss should the Claimant be compensated?

60. What injury to feelings has the discrimination caused the Claimant and how much compensation should be awarded for that?

61. Did the ACAS Code of Practice on Disciplinary and Grievance Procedures apply?

62. Did the Respondent or the Claimant unreasonably fail to comply with it?

63. If so is it just and equitable to increase or decrease any award payable to the Claimant?

64. By what proportion, up to 25%?

65. Should interest be awarded? How much?

Holiday pay (Working Time Regulations 1998)

66. The Claimant says that worked for 1380 hours during her employment (40 hours per week for 34.5 weeks) and her hourly pay was £29.32 (gross pay of £40,457.97/1380) and as such is entitled to £5,453.03).

67. Did the respondent fail to pay the claimant for annual leave the claimant was entitled to due her employment status and had accrued but not taken when their employment ended?

Unauthorised deductions

68. The Claimant says that she was paid £200 a week and the Respondent failed to pay her for her last 8 days of work or for £1040 commission owed and claims the total amount of £1,360.

68.1 If the Claimant was an employee/worker of the Respondent, were the wages paid to the Claimant in June 2023 less than the wages they should have been paid?
68.2 Was any deduction required or authorised by statute?
68.3 Was any deduction required or authorised by a written term of the contract?
68.4 Did the Claimant have a copy of the contract or written notice of the contract term before the deduction was made?
68.5 Did the Claimant agree in writing to the deduction before it was made?
68.6 How much is the Claimant owed?

FINDINGS

69. I considered all of the evidence before me and I found the following facts on a balance of probabilities. I have recorded the findings of fact that are relevant to the legal issues and so not everything that was referred to by the parties before me is recorded.

Respondent’s business

70. The respondent sells home improvement products and services. As set out at paragraph 2 of Filipe Goncalves written statement, ‘The type of work the respondent offered was manufacturing and installing new windows and doors as well as repairs to rooves and guttering (including general maintenance).

71. The respondent conducts its business by telephone canvassers cold calling people about potential home improvements and generating appointments or ‘leads’. The respondent uses sales or field representatives (“reps”) to attend appointments with a view to securing sales of the respondent’s services and products.

72. At paragraph 4 of Filipe Goncalves written statement he explains that, ‘Both the canvassers and the reps are heavily involved in “sales” and there are a number of requirements the operatives have to be aware of, to ensure they comply with the regulations as much as they need to build morale as their roles can be challenging at times when dealing with members of the public. It is critical the operatives know how the business operates, what the products are, how they will be installed, what the benefits are and overall be comfortable in what they are selling.’

Contract

73. The parties do not dispute that the claimant was a rep from 1 September 2022 to 30 June 2023 or that there was a contract in place between them. There was no written contract in evidence before me and as such there are no written contractual terms to consider.

Role and payment

74. The respondent’s position is that reps are self-employed and are neither employees nor workers of the respondent. The respondent’s grounds of resistance set out that the claimant did not have a contract of employment as she was not employed and she had autonomy as to when she worked and was not required to work exclusively for the respondent and was ‘required to provide invoices in the form of a “percentage” of the commission earned from a sale. The invoices were paid in advance of the Respondent receiving payment from the customer.’

75. The claimant does not dispute that the intention at the outset was that she was to be engaged on a self-employed basis. In oral evidence, it was put to the claimant that at interview she was keen to join on a self-employed basis and that this was because she would have flexibility to work her own hours and she said, ‘yes’. The claimant submits however that the reality of the relationship was that she was an employee.

76. There is no dispute that the claimant’s role as a rep was to attend appointments and to sell the respondent’s services and products to customers. The claimant does not dispute that she was paid on a commission basis and her evidence is that she was paid commission and received gross weekly amounts by BACS and that she never received any payslips. There was no documentary evidence before me of any commission claimed or received such as copy invoices, bank statements or such like.

77. Michael Ashley gave evidence that commission was paid on completion of the contract but that if there was any issue with the contract there was provision for clawback of commission advanced. He also said that new starters were paid £200 per week and the respondent took 50% of any commission until payment changed to a full commission basis. Michael Ashley said the switch to full commission was a choice made between management and the individual. The Claimant does not dispute this and refers to the initial ‘safety blanket’ wage in her written statement at paragraph 6 and that her recollection was that she moved to a full commission basis ‘roughly 6 weeks after starting my role’. Michael Ashley explained that the respondent had to make sure the reps had learnt about the products before seeing the customers. The respondent had multiple products and reps would start with learning the specs of the core products which were windows and doors.

78. The claimant’s remedies statement sets out that the average gross monthly amount she received was £4,495.33 based on applying a divisor of 6 to the total amount she earnt for the final 6 months of the engagement and the period 1 January 2023 to 1 July 2023. The respondent did not challenge this amount or suggest it was not representative of the claimant’s average gross monthly pay for this period. I find that for the first 6 weeks of the claimant’s engagement, she earnt less given she was paid £200 a week with the respondent taking 50% of commission earnt.

79. Whilst the grounds of resistance refer to invoices, Mark Pywell explained in oral evidence that reps completed a commission form providing details of what had been sold and prices which correlated to the scale of commission which could be earnt between 1% and 17.5%. The form would then be handed in with the customer contract and signed off by him sitting in head office. He also said that it was possible for another rep to complete a form on someone’s behalf but this was rare, as it was difficult to work out the commission, although there was no rule against this.

80. On the basis of the evidence given therefore, I find that the claimant was paid on a commission only basis rather than being paid for her time when on leads or otherwise. The claimant received commission by submitting the respondent’s commission forms rather than, for example, invoices she generated. I further find that the claimant’s earnings were subject to not only having leads but securing completed sales of the respondent’s products and services off those leads. If a customer cancelled a contract, the grounds of resistance refer to the cancellation period as 14 days, commission was clawed back from reps.

81. I note that there is no dispute that the claimant was responsible for her own tax and I find that she was not paid in the manner an employee would expect to be paid namely via PAYE with the employer taking responsibility for payment of tax and national insurance. There was no real evidence available to me as to the claimant’s status for tax purposes which whilst not determinative may be probative of status for employment law purposes. During submissions, the respondent made reference to the Glaziers Association and that HMRC considered most reps were self-employed for tax purposes but there was no documentary evidence before me regarding this.

Personal service and right to substitute

82. Paragraph 12 of the respondent’s grounds of resistance sets out that the claimant was ‘given availability of appointments so that she could attend when the customer has said they are available. If the Claimant did not want to go to an appointment she was not told to go to an appointment and the Claimant had autonomy to choose when she worked or not. Provided the representative had suitable training and was capable of completing effective work, the Claimant did not have to attend the appointments herself, she could allocate or nominate someone else.’ Further that if the Claimant was not able to attend appointments, there were ‘no implications or performance reviews.’

83. The respondent therefore submits that the claimant could substitute someone else to attend appointments. The respondent submits the claimant did not have to attend appointments herself such that she could substitute someone else whether she was unable or unwilling to attend any appointments provided that person was qualified and that this is inconsistent with personal performance or service.

84. There was no documentary or oral evidence explaining any particular procedures of the respondent as to how it might be demonstrated a person was qualified. The respondent’s witnesses gave evidence about initial training to ensure reps understood the respondent’s products before they went ‘full commission’ and that it was ‘critical’ reps knew how the business operated and the products. Given the reference to a safety blanket wage and the claimant’s evidence that she went full commission after approximately 6 weeks, I find that it would take several weeks before a person was considered suitably trained to go out on leads.

85. Michael Ashley gave evidence that if the claimant was available there was a duty to give her appointments and the claimant had a duty to attend those appointments. When he was asked whether the claimant could send a friend to an appointment in her place, he said, ‘if Molly wanted a friend to learn absolutely’. Michael Ashley gave evidence that he had never had a situation with the claimant where she didn’t go to an appointment either because she was unable or unwilling.

86. I find that if the claimant accepted an appointment, she did not have any unfettered right to substitute another person to go that appointment in her place. Considering the evidence available, I find that any substitution by the claimant could only be of a person who was qualified on the basis that they had done sufficient learning or training with the respondent to know their products. I find that once the claimant accepted a lead and therefore to attend an appointment with a customer, she was to personally do the work.

Hours of work and control

87. The claimant contends that she was not free to work her own hours as she initially understood and that she was expected to be in the office at 9am every morning to undertake training unless allocated leads. Her written statement refers, ‘I understood, within my role, that we were to arrive at the office for 9am, as evidenced in MC1, and were scheduled to work until 5pm, although we could be assigned a lead at any time during the day, the latest lead we typically sat was booked for 5pm. I was told I was to be in the office every morning for 9am, unless I was instructed to work from home, as evidenced in MC2’.

88. The respondent’s position is that training or attendance at the office was not mandatory. Mark Pywell refers, in his written statement, to the respondent as ‘simply a resource for them for leads’ and Michael Ashley sets out at paragraph 2 of his written statement that, ‘The office is a centre for them to work in and is seen as an attractive proposition for them so that they have the resources and support to achieve sales.’ Filipe Goncalves written statement sets out at paragraph 7 that, ‘A typical day would involve me running my training session for reps who wanted to join. I would start the day at a set time of 9am and conclude after about two hours. This was designed like that so that it did not impact on the reps self-employed status where they would be geared up each day with appointments to attend customers homes and sell home improvements.’

89. I find there was training every day at 9am. In oral evidence the claimant agreed it was fair to describe the purpose of the training as to assist learning, raise morale and build reps up for the rest of the day. She agreed that the training was to benefit reps and said she, ‘believed if attended training would sell a higher percentage of leads’. When it was put to the claimant that the training was not compulsory, she said this was not true as they were reprimanded if they did not attend training and also that they would be the last to receive leads for the day.

90. The grounds of resistance set out that ‘appointments are handed to any self- employed representative who is available to complete the work at the time which has been scheduled; the representative is entitled to grow their own business as a result of the appointments they have taken, by returning with sales from customers. The representative…is entitled to grow a bank of customers as she wishes.’

91. Michael Ashley’s evidence was that there was flexibility around whether or not reps attended the office in Kings Lynn. He explained that if an appointment was close to where a rep lived there would be no sense in them coming into the office or returning there afterwards especially when people might live up to an hour away. He said that the market was competitive and sometimes people sought multiple quotes and might expect a rep the same day or soon afterwards and appointments would be allocated to reps with open diaries. He also said that existing customers might have a relationship with a particular rep and ask for that rep to attend.

92. I find that being visible and attending training may well improve chances of being allocated leads when available and enhance the person’s knowledge and skills; the claimant acknowledged this in evidence. I also find that leads close to a person’s residence were likely to be allocated to them and this introduced flexibility in that reps might indicate availability but could be at home waiting for leads.

93. The claimant said she could only be at home when permitted and was told to be in the office every day for 9am. The claimant also refers to having to ask permission to take a break or go for lunch. The claimant also refers to having to ask permission for holiday and that she was not always able to attend regular chiropractor appointments as she was refused time off work. In support of this the claimant relies on documentary evidence as referenced at paragraphs 9 and 10 of her written statement. For reasons related to my findings above as to how the business was carried out and the coherence of the respondent’s evidence in that regard, I do not accept there was a requirement to be in the office starting from 9am and throughout the day although acknowledge the office was there as a base and consider it more likely than not that it was broadly at the centre of the area covered by the respondent. I find that reps could base themselves at the office to be readier to attend a wider geographical spread of leads with ease than if they remained at home. In addition, the documentary evidence relied on by the claimant does not reliably support her contentions.

94. A screenshot of iMessage with a colleague, Dawid, labelled MC1 is highlighted to show a message sent by the claimant on 28 November 2022 – two months after the claimant started - which sets out, ‘Don’t be late tomorrow, talked with Mike he said he will be in early tomorrow, he told me not to be in later than 9, don’t know sounded like he will check when people are coming in, I think not 100% sure’. This message is also at HB100 where the claimant continues ‘Like why would he say that you know’ and Dawid’s reply ‘Okay mate no worries. Thanks for the heads up.’ MC2 is a screenshot of a message on 20 November 2022 from ‘Micheal Ashely EAHI’ highlighting ‘Work from home tomorrow morning please as I’m in a bit later will get you out from there.’ MC3 shows messages with Dawid from 26 June 2023 towards the end of the relationship and highlights the claimant asking Dawid, ‘If you get a Starbucks will you get me one please’, then a reply ‘Ask the boss kid’ with two laughing face emojis and then later the message ‘Can’t go get a drink’ to which the claimant asks ‘why’ with two laughing face emojis and Dawid replies ‘We going over everything’. There are other messages which were referred to during the hearing concerning food for lunch.

95. This evidence does not clearly support the contentions either that the claimant was required to be in the office at 9am and could only be at home when permitted or that she had to ask permission to leave the office to get food or take a break. MC1 is not independent documentary evidence and is the claimant’s own report of a conversation with Michael Ashley. The conversation took place reasonably soon after the claimant started. Michael Ashley gave evidence that he did not recall this conversation. I acknowledge it gives the superficial impression that Michael Ashley was exercising a degree of control and supervision by checking when people were attending the office although equally, as the sales manager, he may have wanted awareness of who was attending training and building knowledge. I note this was close in time to the start of the claimant’s engagement with the respondent and I have no clear date as to when the claimant was considered sufficiently knowledgeable to go ‘full commission’ started. The messages also indicate that attendance at 9am was either not taken particularly seriously or obligatory given the claimant was suggesting Dawid should get in to the office for 9am the following day because of her understanding that the sales manager would be there that day. If there was a clear requirement to attend at 9am, it is unclear why the claimant would question the reason for the sales manager communicating that she should be in for 9am. There is no dispute that training was available at that time and as set out above visibility was likely to result in leads.

96. MC2 is a message again sent reasonably soon after the claimant started and is not evidence of the claimant having to seek permission to work at home but presents as Michael Ashley referring to getting the claimant out on a lead from where she lived so suggesting she stay at home that morning rather than travel to Kings Lynn which is further consistent with his oral evidence.

97. In cross-examination, Michael Ashley agreed the last appointment was typically at 5pm and was taken to HB 128 (also MC2) and asked whether the claimant’s message, ‘I have an appointment tonight at 6:30 just to let you know, so if it possible to be done by then that would be amazing!:) dated 18 November 2022 indicated that the claimant needed approval to finish by 6.30. Michael Ashley referred to this as a ‘courtesy’ on the claimant’s side and that where the claimant’s diary was open for the day, they would proactively try and supply appointments or opportunities for her on that day.

98. Michael Ashley was referred to a message from the claimant on 3 April 2023 noting that she had been on a waiting list with a chiropractor for 6 months and had just been told she could be fitted in the next day or the day after and ‘I haven’t booked anything yet as obviously wanted to check with you, I know Fil is obviously off and it’s just me and laine. And I wanted to see if there was a day that would work better for you.’ Michael Ashley’s reply is, ‘No problem I’m off today I’ll speak to nim should be fine Graeme and karter are both working as well’. Shortly after the claimant replies, ‘I’ve rearranged.’ It was put in cross- examination that Michael Ashley did not reply to the effect of ‘of course you are a free agent’ but rather that he would need to check with ‘nim’. Michael Ashley said that he had not been working that day and that if the claimant was available, it would be Nim who allocated any appointments so it would have been wrong to reply no problem.

99. It was put to Michael Ashley again that the claimant had to ask if she could go to a 7pm appointment and he agreed that was the case if the claimant had made themselves available and referred to this being more about her diary. He was referred to another ‘no problem’ reply in response to the claimant asking to book holiday 3 weeks in advance and it was put to him that this suggested approval was required as this wasn’t on the day or likely to interfere with existing appointments. Michael Ashley gave evidence that whilst not impossible it was highly unlikely a fresh customer appointment would have been booked into the claimant’s diary that far in advance although not impossible there could have been an appointment with an existing customer. Michael Ashley maintained that leave didn’t need to be approved and he interpreted the messages as the claimant trying to be respectful around ensuring the respondent was aware of her availability.

100. I note that there was no documentary evidence before me of the appointment booking system or the claimant’s ‘diary’ or as to any procedure for notifying availability or non-availability to attend appointments. The lack of any formal process means that the claimant’s messages can arguably be interpreted either way. The claimant contends they demonstrate notification and request for permission or approval around either holidays or other time off. Michael Ashley’s evidence was to the effect that the messages demonstrate more courtesy and common sense around whether the claimant might have a lead and as such prefer to book her personal appointment so as to preserve that lead and/or to be accommodating to the business on an understanding that only a certain number of reps were available and to set leave dates at a mutually convenient time or simply to indicate when she would not be available.

101. MC4 is a screenshot of messages between the claimant and Filipe Goncalves or ‘Fill’ on 28 November 2022 highlighting a request from the claimant, ‘can I book some dates off please?’ Fill’s reply is ‘6th early finish is fine 9th 12th & 13th okay But on the 8th someone is already off so can’t do that one’. Fill’s refusal to accommodate the claimant being unavailable on a date 10 days after the request is problematic. Absent any other contextual information such as the claimant referring to dates where she has appointments booked in, it is difficult to construe Fill’s reply as other than exercising a degree of control requiring the claimant to be available on that date. In cross-examination, Filipe Goncalves was asked whether it was right that the claimant had to request holidays and his evidence was that they had to ‘notify them’ so they were ‘aware which reps were available for appointments’. It was put to Filipe Goncalves that the refusal of the 8th December showed he was able to decline requests for holiday. Filipe Goncalves said that this was the ‘agreement we always had if the reps numbers were low to keep as many available and working as possible’. In this context, ‘can’t do’ could be read as consistent with a practice to keep sufficient reps available and a colloquial or informal indication in a conversation around availability and that from his side, the claimant indicating she was not available on that date didn’t work for him. There was no real exploration with Filipe Goncalves as to what might have transpired if the claimant had insisted or notified that she was not available on 8th.

102. I find the evidence overall is consistent with the parties managing mutual availability and accommodating each other. The lack of formality works both ways and it is not evident that the claimant had less bargaining power in this arrangement. There was insufficient evidence available to demonstrate to the balance of probabilities that the claimant was subject to the degree of control that she had to request permission which could be withheld as to her availability.

103. The claimant relies on MC5 as demonstrating that she was refused time off work to attend chiropractor appointments which she had to attend regularly and was subject to cancellation fees. I note the message referred to above dated April 2023 refers to the claimant having been on a waiting list for the 6 months prior. The claimant says she has a slipped disc in her back. MC5 is a screenshot of an exchange of messages on 19 June 2023. The claimant is messaged, ‘Just checking you’d still like the 9am appointment on Wednesday 21st?’ The claimant has highlighted her reply ‘Morning. I’m so sorry but I’m really struggling to get any time off work at the moment as we are really understaffed. I won’t be able to make the appointment.’ The reply is ‘Never any problem.’ This exchange of messages does not demonstrate the claimant having been refused time off to attend the appointment referred to and nor does it demonstrate the claimant was charged any cancellation fee for not attending. I note that there was no other contextual documentary evidence available to me – such as medical evidence - as to the necessity or frequency of these chiropractor appointments.

104. There was no documentary evidence supporting the suggestion that salespersons had to ask for permission to go to lunch or take a break. There was no written evidence before me at all to suggest any formality around work hours or breaks or times to take lunch. An exchange of messages between colleagues about picking up a coffee if one was going out or a proposal to go out or order food from a particular place does not reliably demonstrate to the relevant standard that permission was required to take lunch or a break. Dawid’s message that he was going through something and as such he can’t go to get a drink does not evidence that he had been refused permission or was required to ask. In my view, the brief message suggests he was occupied and was not going out and nothing more. It is not clear who ‘boss kid’ is supposed to be and that the messages were accompanied by many emojis does not indicate any real deference to hierarchy or frustration around this.

105. Based on the available evidence, I find that the claimant was not required to ask permission either to take breaks or to order or go out for lunch. I accept that attendance at training and visibility and presence in the King’s Lynn office would likely result in allocation of leads particularly in relation to accessibility from that base. However, I find that the claimant had autonomy around when she indicated she was available to attend leads. I further find that the claimant had flexibility as to whether she attended the King’s Lynn office and when she did so.

Working for others

106. In cross-examination it was put to the claimant that she could make her own leads and she said that she was not aware and ‘we never did that’. It was put to her that no-one stopped her and she said, ‘no-one made us aware that was a possibility’. The respondent refers to building a customer base. A lead or even customers requesting a particular rep from the respondent is different from a person working for a competitor or having their own ‘client book’.

107. The claimant did not work for anyone else. The respondent submitted that there was no restriction on reps working for more than one company and reps could work for anyone. The respondent submitted that a lead might want products that the respondent did not make or provide. Michael Ashley was cross-examined about this and said that in doing door to door sales, a person might work for or have a relationship with another company that supplied a product the respondent did not supply or when the customer was outside an area covered by the respondent’s office. He referred to the fact that the respondent did not do appointments on weekends or bank holidays and that the respondent would have no right to tell a rep they can’t attend any such appointment.

108. However, Michael Ashley was not able to give any examples from his experience with the respondent of reps selling products for others or indicating in advance of engagement that they sold for other companies. However, Michael Ashley did not accept that the reality was that reps could only work for the respondent. He said, ‘how answer that. I understand what you are saying in reality if someone wanted to work or cover appointments for another company. I personally never told the claimant she was not allowed to do that.’ He did say that it would be unacceptable if the customer lead and data came from the respondent for a rep to agree with that customer a cheaper order for another company.

109. During the hearing, a ‘new starter form’ was provided. In oral evidence, the claimant referred to signing a document when she started. Michael Ashley gave evidence about a ‘new starter form’. The respondent provided a copy during the hearing; the copy provided is not signed by the claimant but presents as completed by the claimant. I consider it is more likely than not that the purpose of this form was to obtain sufficient personal information to enable the respondent to make payments to the claimant. The respondent submitted that was the purpose of the form and the failure to provide it earlier was omission rather than deliberate.

110. The form contains personal information such as name, address and bank details of the claimant. Against ‘Employment Start date dd/mm/yyyy’ a date of 30 August 2022 is given. The form gives three options to choose from and the claimant has circled the option which informs that ‘this is now their only job’ rather than the option that ‘they have another job’ or ‘this is their first job since last 6 April’. The claimant submitted that the references to ‘employment’ and ‘job’ provided support for the claimant’s contention that she was an employee. The reference to employment is somewhat incongruous in a context where the respondent maintains that it has no employees and only has persons who are self-employed but I consider the language is not intended to connote any legal meaning in light of what I find to be the primary purpose of the form.

111. I find the options on the form relating to tax and benefits somewhat more incongruous given the respondent had no responsibility for tax. The respondent also submits that the claimant could work for others on the basis that this is an obvious feature of self-employment. The respondent therefore does not require information about whether a person has or has had other jobs or whether their only job is with the respondent.

112. There is no real evidence available to me that the claimant was either told she could not work for others or that she could. Whilst there was oral evidence suggesting that reps could work for others including competitors, this was a feature that only came out in any detail in oral evidence in circumstances where the evidence was also that on the ground there was no awareness that this was being done by anyone. There is no basis in the evidence available to me to find that this was an express term of the contract. It is also not an inevitable feature of all self-employed arrangements that a person works or is able to work for more than one other.

113. There is also a difference between an ability to work for others and working in a way that introduces conflict and competition between multiple clients. Michael Ashley’s evidence was clear on this in that use of the respondent’s data to generate sales for others would be unacceptable. The claimant submitted that the suggestion in evidence that the reps could use their sales skills to generate sales for competitors was incredible unless this was outside the area or region covered by the respondent. I take account of the lack of evidence of reps working for others coupled with the lack of any real documentary evidence to suggest this was customary in the sector. I cannot find that there was any implied term of the claimant’s contract that she could freely work for others and competitors in the sector/region. I also find that when the claimant accepted a lead, the expectation was that she would use her skill to secure a sale for the respondent and the respondent would not countenance sales by the rep of other company’s products or services during that appointment.

Kings’ Lynn Office

114. There is no dispute that most of the reps were men and that during most of the claimant’s engagement with the respondent she was the only female rep. The claimant refers to the environment as competitive. A competitive environment is not confined to a workplace dominated by men and a competitive environment in a workplace where the aim is to secure sales is not inherently a workplace where harassment occurs and as such I do not consider it problematic per se.

115. The claimant also refers to the environment as characterised by ‘locker room chat’, a phrase that is referred to in the Oxford English dictionary as derived from the US and connoting attitudes or behaviour associated with or considered typical of a men’s locker room (changing room) especially being vulgar or coarse where men are not amongst women. Whilst this type of language may well be offensive, it does not follow that it will always amount to harassment even if I find it more likely than not that any such environment is not conducive to a professional working environment or inclusive of women. This description of the workplace is not accepted by the respondent.

116. The claimant contends that she was subject to sexual harassment throughout her engagement by Filipe Goncalves but also raises allegations of sexual harassment against Michael Ashley and Iain Lewis together with an allegation of harassment related to sex against Filipe Goncalves. As such the claimant contends there was a course of conduct and all her allegations are therefore made in time.

117. The respondent’s case is that the claimant has made up her account and it was significant that allegations were raised when the claimant left and that there was no reason not to have drawn the respondent’s attention to the behaviours she was experiencing earlier.

118. In her particulars of claim, the claimant sets out that on 20 June 2023, ‘I had contacted my regional manager, Mark Pywell, for guidance due to the treatment I was experiencing, and also quite frankly because I was at breaking point. Upon discovering I had done this, Filipe told me if I ever contacted Mark again I would be fired immediately. I again was being threatened with dismissal for raising my concerns about the treatment I had received.’ Although the paragraph immediately prior refers to the claimant having been threatened with dismissal if she ever told telephone canvassers she had attended an appointment for more than two hours, the preceding paragraphs refer to finding it difficult to challenge ‘these behaviours’ after a bullet point list of the claimant’s allegations of harassment. I find it is a fair reading of the claim form that the claimant is setting out that she called Mark Pywell to discuss the conduct she alleges was harassment and thus contending that she had raised these matters with the respondent before leaving.

119. Paragraph 8 of Mark Pywell’s statement sets out ‘I had no contact with Mollie during her time as a representative, save for one phone call.’ In oral evidence, he said that he had other contact with her in person when visiting from the head office but only one phone call which was the meaning of what he had set out in his statement. The only reason he had referred in his statement to the claimant falsifying commissions was because he understood he was required to address a particular call had with the claimant due to her claim. Paragraph 8 continues ‘I was made aware of Mollie through Michael Ashley…spoke to me as he was concerned that Mollie had falsified commissions.’ In cross-examination, Mark Pywell was asked if he was aware that this was a form completed on Molly’s behalf. He acknowledged that he was aware of this but when asked why he had not mentioned this in his witness statement, he said that the reference was just to explain the reason the claimant had called him and that was the one time she had called him. At paragraph 13, Mark Pywell sets out that there was no discussion about anything to do with the working environment.

120. The claimant acknowledged under cross-examination and indeed a document setting out her recall of the call does not suggest otherwise that the call had not related to the harassment allegations she raises. The claimant says her call was related to her understanding that the respondent wanted her gone in a context where she says she was having meetings with Michael Ashley and Filipe Goncalves about her performance. The claimant accepts that during her last three months she wasn’t making sales and as such her commission was down. Accordingly, the evidence at the hearing was inconsistent with the information in the particulars of claim. Whilst Mark Pywell’s statement suggests he only had one interaction with the claimant and suggests she had falsified commissions, I consider he gave a reasonable explanation about this aspect of his written statement.

121. Given that Mark Pywell accepts he had a call with the claimant, it is odd that Nimesh Patel sets out in his written statement at paragraph 7 that ‘I know that she has never spoken to Mark Pywell either.’ It was put to him that he could not know that unless he had spoken to either the claimant or Mark Pywell about this as otherwise, he would not have that knowledge and as such it was assumption. Nimesh Patel did eventually acknowledge this in oral evidence but maintained that Mark Pywell would have called him if anyone had spoken to him. I consider the only possible explanation for this evidence is that Nimesh Patel understood that he was being asked about a call with Mark Pywell about allegations of harassment which he reasonably anticipated Mark Pywell would bring to his attention.

122. I find that the claimant did not speak to Mark Pywell about the treatment she was experiencing which she alleges was harassment and that it was not raised during her employment.

123. The respondent submits that Nimesh Patel’s statement is characterised by the tendency to raise argument than set out facts known to him. For example, Nimesh Patel suggests that if the claimant’s allegations about Filipe Goncalves and Michael Ashley were genuine, she would have raised a grievance or spoken with either him or Mark Pywell. The statement sets out at paragraph 4 that if the claimant had singled out Filipe Goncalves, Nimesh Patel would ‘need to comment purely on Filipe standards and my knowledge on him’. The statement continues to refer to the claimant having made wider allegations against Michael Ashley and the branch before making points about the claimant not providing examples and that it is untrue there is a systemic cultural problem. The statement ends with the rhetorical question, ‘Surely if this was the type of

office I ran, I would have other complainants?’

124. There is therefore some merit in the claimant’s submission that the respondent’s witness statements are characterised by a tendency to argue rather than state facts and to include matters undermining the claimant such as the reference to falsifying commissions without also setting out awareness that she had not personally done so as the form had been completed by another rep. I note that if Nimesh Patel ran a deeply misogynistic office, women may well not feel willing to come forward to raise complaint about that with him and as such the absence of prior complaint does not provide a complete answer to whether or not the claimant’s allegations are genuine. Nimesh Patel was asked why he had not commented on Filipe’s standards but did not give any real explanation about that and he does not provide any evidence therefore about Filipe’s character. Whilst he was not always present in the office, it is difficult to reconcile Nimesh Patel’s evidence that he never observed any problematic behaviours at all with the claimant’s allegations of repeated inappropriate comments about her attire and other matters. It is possible he simply did not observe any or was not particularly observant.

125. Mark Pywell was also questioned about paragraph 3 of his written statement as he set out that, that ‘there has never been a single other issue regarding quality of work, working conditions or unprofessional behaviours or cultures’. Mark Pywell gave oral evidence that an issue that arose with commission forms was people ‘fiddling the figures’ but he was resistant to accepting that this surely represented unprofessional conduct. Although I appreciate that as a senior manager who worked at head office, Mark Pywell was not routinely present where the claimant was based, I found Mark Pywell’s resistance in evidence to acknowledging any type of difficulty in the workplace of concern. It was not clear to me why, when directly confronted with the idea that ‘fiddling the figures’ (his words) was surely unprofessional, he could not simply acknowledge this to be the case.

126. I note that the respondent raised with the claimant in cross-examination that she had an attitude problem and this of itself is a workplace behaviour issue.

127. When the claimant was asked if she had an attitude problem, she initially said she didn’t understand. It was put to the claimant that she had an aggressive attitude and was obstructive and difficult to communicate with. The claimant replied, ‘are you asking if I was aggressive or difficult’ and when she was told yes, the claimant said ‘no’. The claimant said that she was certainly not aggressive as a 20 or 21 year old to middle aged men and found it comical she would be asked that but she would stand her ground and make her point.

128. The claimant was referred to a voice message from March 2023 referring ‘not fucking talk over me’ (HB 106) and said speech at work would be very different from when talking freely with family and friends. In an exchange of messages with Dawid dated 12 April 2023 (HB 98), the claimant writes ‘The reason I got 2 leads last week was for attitude problems in February’ accompanied by four laughing face emojis. Dawid reply includes ‘Well at least it all out and you can go back to doing your job’ and the claimant replies ‘Well I just went out and sold so he can suck that attitude problem’ accompanied by more laughing face emojis. When Dawid asks about February, the claimant replies, ‘Fuck knows mate.’

129. I find the impression given by some of the messages does indicate that the claimant’s tone and language use could have been construed as aggressive if she expressed herself similarly in the office. In principle I accept that persons may use different registers in professional and personal contexts but that is different from finding certain expressions and word choices typical or commonly used by everyone outside a workplace. Having considered the content, I reasonably infer that the claimant had been made aware of a perceived attitude problem and did not take that seriously.

130. The claimant says she found it difficult to challenge the behaviours she alleges she experienced and I have reflected on this given the context in which she maintains she could stand her ground. I fully acknowledge that there are types of behaviour such as sexual harassment which any person may find difficult to raise however assertive they may typically be. However, it remains the case that the claimant did not formally or informally raise these behaviours during her engagement with the respondent.

131. Mark Pywell gave oral evidence that there were no written or other policies of the respondent addressing discrimination or grievances and managers were not trained on discrimination. He said that everyone who worked with the respondent was self-employed. His evidence was that if anyone had a grievance they could go to managers, himself or the owners. The only policy referred to was one related to the old and vulnerable; this was asked for by the Glass and Glazing Federation. Mark Pywell stated in oral evidence that, ‘after this incident all managers have to sign a policy to make them aware what they can and cannot say.’ Asked whether this had therefore been a learning experience, Mark Pywell said, ‘no not a learning experience, if someone makes things up to make sure we are covered’.

132. Mark Pywell gave evidence that he had previously had training about investigating grievances from a HR department in a different company in about 2014. Mark Pywell refers to investigating and that ‘I have found no evidence to support the claims against Filipe Goncalves’ at paragraph 11 of his statement although no details of the steps taken are set out. Mark Pywell was asked about investigation given his evidence was that he had not spoken to the claimant about matters related to the allegations of harassment. The claimant did not personally raise any grievance whilst working with the respondent about the behaviours the subject of her allegations.

133. The claimant submits that paragraph 11 provides another example of setting out argument rather than fact as it reads, ‘this suggestion that a woman is told to flaunt herself to get customers is so peculiar, not only do I find it crude, but I would say it is said with a youthful inexperience of what a person would expect to see in a workplace if they were harassed, victimised or discriminated against.’ The statement is oddly phrased in that it dismisses the idea that telling a woman to flaunt herself to get customers could be unwanted conduct related to sex or of a sexual nature. Mark Pywell does not give detail of what he would expect to see in a workplace if there was harassment or discrimination. Mark Pywell did not accept in evidence that he had not approached matters with an open mind and was pre-disposed to find against the claimant or that by not speaking with the claimant he had not conducted a full investigation. To the extent Mark Pywell looked into the allegations raised, I do not consider that he conducted any formal investigation and there is certainly no record of any process followed, persons interviewed or investigation report.

134. I find that both Mark Pywell and Nimesh Patel have limited experience of addressing and dealing with allegations of discrimination. I accept that they may not have faced any tribunal claims previously. However, whilst they may personally have not observed any problematic behaviours including in particular by Filipe Goncalves, I considered that the evidence that there were no difficulties or problems ever arising in a workplace with a changing population of reps coming and going whether as regards inappropriate comments or any other type of problem was implausible and gave the impression of complacency.

Comments

135. The claimant contends that she was subject to sexual harassment from the start and throughout her engagement with the respondent in the form of comments about her appearance twice a week on average (allegation 2), crude jokes about her sex life several times a month (allegation 3) and consistently encouraged to use her sex to make sales (allegations 4 and 5).

136. At paragraph 16 of her written statement, the claimant refers to being subjected to multiple and frequent comments from Filipe Goncalves about how she looked or what she was wearing and how it would show off her physique referring to exhibit MC17 and that ‘Fill even went as far as to say, on one occasion “It’s hard to not look at your arse when your skirt falls in all the right places.” The claimant continues that these comments were ‘often made in front of the entire office’. There is no evidence other than the claimant’s oral evidence that she was subjected to these types of comments and with the frequency she alleges. The claimant only provides one concrete example of a comment she alleges was made to her and gives no information about the date on which this alleged comment was made. The claimant does not suggest it was made more recently as a reason it is the one comment she recalls. There is only one written reference of relevance which is a message from February 2023 in which comment being made about short skirts is referenced (MC17) although Dawid’s reply is that he didn’t notice this.

137. I note that many reps were attending training on a regular basis and the claimant has not produced any witnesses supporting her account that there were frequent comments of the type she alleges. I also note that reps were free to come and go from the office which was a base for them and refer to my findings above that they were not required to remain there.

138. When the claimant was asked if the one comment she had cited was, given she had stated ‘went as far as’, the worst or most extreme comment she had been subjected to, she did not accept this and said in relation to that comment, ‘I guess this stuck out to me’, although there are no other comments detailed or referred to that have stuck with the claimant and her references are in general and unspecified terms to comments about her attire. On the one hand, it might be considered inappropriate to comment about a person’s attire at all although on the other hand comments about appropriate dress in a sales context could well be reasonable within a training context and to ensure a good impression of the respondent was presented through the reps to potential customers.

139. Given that the claimant relies on extensive messages with Dawid during her time with the respondent, it is odd that there is only one reference to Filipe Goncalves having referred to ‘short skirts’ in February 2023 (HB95) which Dawid had not noticed and very little and indeed virtually no reference to any other problematic behaviours as they allegedly occurred such as the stated crude jokes of which no real examples are provided.

140. The claimant accepted in evidence that the text messages and transcripts of voicemails presented were not complete but I consider the claimant must be taken to have produced those communications she has that she considers support her case. The respondent says the transcripts are unverified. I note that the transcripts provided by the claimant and stated to be of her voice messages do not always present the claimant in a good light such as the inclusion of frequent swear words. The claimant submitted that the only point raised against the claimant was that she had given oral evidence that she never lied but been taken to a transcript of one of her own voicemails in which she referred to lying to Michael Ashley. The claimant submitted that a clear explanation had been given in oral evidence about this in that she might lie about menial things but never to a Judge or when it was serious.

141. The claimant’s oral evidence that such lies are not problematic nonetheless indicates willingness to be proactively dishonest about matters which she subjectively considered were not of importance although I fully acknowledge that lying about certain potentially peripheral matters does not demonstrate that a person is not telling the truth about other matters. In circumstances where the claimant has produced a reasonable volume of messages sent during her employment demonstrating her willingness to communicate very informally and frankly with Dawid, I do consider it relevant and of significance that this evidence contains very limited indications of any contemporaneous complaint or reference to unwelcome comments or unwanted conduct when she says she received this throughout the engagement on a regular basis.

142. Given the lack of detail and that the allegations are general and unspecific although comments are said to have been received very frequently, it is difficult to assess the nature of any such comments particularly against the benchmark of the one alleged comment which stuck out to the claimant. The claimant identifies this comment being ‘as far as’ indicative of that comment standing out to her and being of the most extreme on her appearance. I accept that the claimant received this comment and found it unwelcome although there is no real evidence as to when this particular comment was made. For reasons referred to below consider it could not have been prior to December 2022. Given the claimant has been able to date other incidents including clarifying an alleged incident of harassment occurred in March 2023 rather than June 2023 and is clear that the wager comment being the other comment that stuck in her mind was in December 2022, I consider it more likely than not that this undated comment about her appearance occurred earlier in her engagement.

143. However, I considered that there was insufficient evidence of real detail to find that the claimant was subjected to frequent comments always and entirely of this nature during the entirety of her engagement with the respondent. I find it particularly significant that the claimant has not been able to detail comments made more recently and towards the end of her engagement even if she cannot recall everything that was said to her including comments she alleges were made in the early stages of her engagement which was approximately a year prior to the presentation of her claim.

144. I also take account of the feature which I refer to in more detail below that the claimant continued to ask Filipe Goncalves to accompany her on watches throughout her engagement with the respondent which is very difficult to reconcile with the allegations of sustained unwanted conduct of a sexual nature by him against her. I concluded that the conduct had not occurred as alleged in terms of the frequency alleged. In particular given the evidence in relation to the wager addressed below cannot find it was occurring prior to December 2022 as unwanted conduct. Therefore, I also find that the evidence does not demonstrate to the required standard that this formed part of conduct extending so as to fall in time.

Using sex to make sales

145. The claimant alleges she was told the reason for her hire was as she would not intimidate elderly customers and that she could flirt and flaunt with male customers to make sales. I consider it is neither implausible nor lacks credibility that there was a perception that a female rep might be less intimidating to elderly customers. I note that Mark Pywell referred to a code relating to vulnerable and elderly and clearly the respondent needed to ensure that potential customers were not being taken advantage of. It is possible that the claimant found any comments about this unwelcome in focussing on her sex rather than her merit in engaging with such customers or making such sales. However, it is difficult to understand how any such comments would have been made with the purpose or reasonably have the effect of violating the claimant’s dignity or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for her given the circumstances including the context of attention to the code on sales to the elderly and vulnerable.

146. In relation to comments about use of her sex to make sales with male customers, I consider that such comments would be inherently unwanted conduct. The respondent submits that approaching sales in that manner would be ineffective especially in light of the cancellation period that all customers had. I considered the respondent’s justification as to why it was unlikely comments were made to encourage the claimant to use her sex to make sales reasonable and plausible. The respondent’s witnesses gave evidence that they were alive to the risk presented when attending appointments alone and that results were achieved through responsible sales techniques as this minimised cancellations.

147. Filipe Goncalves sets out at paragraph 18 of his written statement that, ‘sex doesn’t sell home improvements, but looking smart, professional, having good knowledge, high morals and values does as customers need to feel reassured, confident and trusting especially in the first meeting.’

148. Michael Ashley was asked if he told the claimant she was a good appointment as she could attend single male leads and elderly leads. Michael Ashley’s evidence was that occasionally customers who had bad experiences and were anxious might ask for him directly or women but they would not take someone on just because they were female or male. When it was put to Michael Ashley that the claimant was told to use the fact she was female to flirt and flaunt with male customers, he said that he, ‘had never heard that’ and there was no ‘conversation with myself or anyone else’.

149. Michael Ashley was challenged about the differences between the statement initially served and the one he wished to rely on for the hearing. In particular that after setting out, ‘Mollie has said that I used to simply allow Filipe to be misogynistic’ original paragraph 15 contained the sentence, ‘Filipe is the last person to be misogynistic and I do not know why she wants to say this to another kind generous and good natured individual’ but equivalent paragraph 13 had removed that sentence. Accordingly, the evidence relied on by Michael Ashley at the hearing did not include any evidence about Filipe’s character. Another removal was the sentence, ‘In my view, there is no sexual discrimination, no victimisation and no harassment towards her in any way’ from original paragraph 17 in equivalent paragraph 14. Michael Ashley was asked if the removal was because he did not want to sign a statement of truth with that. Michael Ashley gave evidence that he wanted to keep things simple to stuff he could prove and there were things he couldn’t prove. Taken to the removed sentence at paragraph 13, it was put to Michael Ashley that he couldn’t make that statement because Filipe Goncalves made comments about skirts. Michael Ashley said that had not happened in his presence and he can’t say there was misogyny as he had not seen or witnessed that and that he had initially put what he felt given Filipe’s character but considered wrong to say things had or hadn’t been said if he was not there.

150. Michael Ashley gave evidence that the claimant had not complained to him about Filipe Goncalves’ behaviour in terms of sexist comments or about skirts and he did not know about any wager. Referred to the one comment the claimant cites, Michael Ashley said that ‘categorically not allow people to talk like that’. Michael Ashley said that he had never heard Filipe boasting about pushing his girlfriend and denied saying ‘that’s just Filipe being Filipe and he doesn’t think before he speaks’. The claimant has provided a transcript of a voice message dated 16 January 2023 in which she refers to a conversation with Michael Ashley which includes Michael Ashley reportedly saying that he i.e. Filipe would never tell me that as he knows I wouldn’t stand for it which is consistent with the oral evidence given by Michael Ashley. (HB 103)

151. I consider the circumstances of serving one unsigned statement and then serving another altered signed statement without highlighting that a different statement is being served when the bundle is sent are not ideal although before the tribunal each statement was available for and was subjected to comparison. I found Michael Ashley’s explanation when challenged about this reasonable in that he did not want to make statements about matters which on reflection related to things alleged to have occurred which he had not seen. I consider this measured. I found Michael Ashley a credible witness. He acknowledged matters appropriately during his evidence and maintained his position about certain aspects when challenged; he answered the questions he was asked.

152. I considered the available evidence about whether the claimant was encouraged to flirt and flaunt herself to make sales. I accepted the respondent’s evidence and explanations regarding this and found it was more likely than not that this practice was not encouraged. I concluded that there was insufficient evidence other than generalised and unspecific assertions to reach any secure findings about this having occurred on any particular occasion. I therefore also find that this could not form part of conduct extending so as to fall in time.

Wager

153. The claimant’s particulars of claim set out that in December 2022, a colleague told her that Filipe Goncalves and another colleague had ‘placed a wager between themselves as to who would sleep with me first’. The claimant’s written statement refers to the colleague who told her about this wager as ‘Iain’ and at paragraph 12 that he ‘disclosed to me that he was aware of a wager that had been placed, when I initially started working for the company. The wager consisted of Fill, Matas (lead canvasser) and various other colleagues, betting on “who could bed me first”. Iain explained that this bet was placed before they had got time to know me and realise, I was in a long-term committed relationship.’ At paragraph 13 of her written statement, the claimant sets out that this comment, made by Ian, stuck with her during her entire time with the respondent ‘as it was the first time I felt my colleagues, one of which was a member of management, sexualised me and singled me out, all down to my sex’.

154. The claimant was asked in cross-examination why she had not named Iain in her particulars of claim and she answered that she was ‘concerned about getting Iain in trouble’. When the claimant was asked why she had referred to two colleagues in her particulars of claim but referred to there being other colleagues involved in her written statement, the claimant initially said that she didn’t understand the question. It was suggested to the claimant that her memory may have been better when she did her claim form than when she prepared her written statement later. The claimant maintained that her memory was the same and that the reason was because she couldn’t name the other colleagues involved. It was put to the claimant that the claim form reference to Filipe Goncalves and one other set out a different story from the suggestion in the written statement that many others were involved naming Matas. The claimant said that she didn’t think it did look like a different story.

155. I did have some concerns about the differences between what was set out in the particulars of claim and the written statement and some of the answers given in evidence and the differences were not all explained by the claimant in oral evidence or by reference to the passage of time and difficulties of recall. I set out above the alteration from the particulars of claim that suggested the claimant had raised her allegations with Mark Pywell whereas her evidence before the tribunal had changed to be consistent with his version of the call. The claimant’s written evidence that the comment about the wager was the first time she felt sexualised was in December 2022 is inconsistent with allegations that from the outset of her engagement she was subjected to comments of a sexual nature. The claimant understandably does not recall everything that was said to her but she has given very few details of comments made beyond a general description that they related to her appearance and dress in a context where she does refer to one comment that stuck with her and was the first time she felt sexualised.

156. Whilst Iain Lewis gave evidence, his written statement does not directly address the allegation against him that he told her she could seduce and flirt with male customers or the allegation that he told the claimant about the wager. Iain Lewis told the tribunal he had attended only to speak to Filipe’s character and it would appear that his written statement was not prepared with any focus on the fact that there were allegations raised directly against him or factual matters that he could relevantly speak to even if to deny or set out that he could not, for example, recall telling the claimant about any such wager. There is some merit in the claimant’s submission that the manner of preparation generally damaged credibility of the respondent’s witnesses although this submission specifically referred to alteration of Michael Ashley’s statement and the failure to disclose the new starter form. However, the respondent has also had to confront allegations that lack detail.

157. Filipe Goncalves denies that there was any such wager. At paragraph 15 of his statement he says, ‘This is simply a lie and I deny it was said or took place.’ I observe that claimant’s oral evidence that she did not want to get Iain in trouble suggests that what she complains about is not him having made the comment to her even if the written statement refers to the comment and that it stuck in her mind but the understanding that there had been a wager made between two or more colleagues about her. The allegation is that a wager had been made and that she knew about this from December 2022. The claimant’s evidence is that she was also told it was made before colleagues knew she was in a long-term relationship from which I reasonably infer that any wager did not subsist after colleagues were aware of the claimant’s long-term relationship. There is no clear evidence as to when the claimant may have made colleagues aware of her long-term relationship although the claimant’s information as to what Iain said to her suggests this was prior to December 2022.

158. The claimant’s evidence is clear that this comment was made and it stuck with her and I accept this evidence; I find there is no reason not to find her credible as to this. There is no information or evidence to suggest that she directly confronted anyone about the wager or sought further information or even tried to ascertain whether the information given by Iain was true. I find that any such wager is unwanted conduct of a sexual nature although it is difficult to reach secure findings about whether and when this conduct was occurring and who it concerned other than that this was prior to or around December 2022.

159. Considering the evidence overall and assessing all the circumstances including taking account of my findings in relation to allegations 2,3,4 and 5, I have concluded that this incident did not form part of a course of conduct which extended into June 2023. I find that the wager is sufficiently discrete and different from the conversation that occurred on 16 March 2023 and the incidents thereafter such that even if Filipe Goncalves was involved in any wager, these incidents are not linked by his involvement so as to found a continuing campaign of harassment by him against the claimant.

Conversation on 16 March 2023

160. There is no dispute that a conversation took place on 16 March 2023 between the claimant and Filipe Goncalves after they had attended a lead together. I note that attending a lead together was not unusual. Filipe Goncalves gave evidence that his role alongside training would be to support the reps to secure sales and the claimant refers to asking Filipe Goncalves to go on ‘watches’ with her. The claimant accepted that the date she had given in her particulars of claim of 21 June 2023 for this conversation was not correct. The claimant accepts that she volunteered information about having suffered miscarriages which were playing on her mind as Mother’s Day approached. The claimant says that Filipe Goncalves told her that this was ‘a blessing in disguise as he did not believe that I wanted children right now, or that I would be able to cope if I did have them. He likened the situation to when he was unable to see his children for six weeks after his divorce.’

161. Filipe Goncalves evidence is that his response to the claimant’s information about miscarriages was to share personal information he had not shared with anyone previously ‘to reach out’ to her. Filipe Goncalves evidence is that he referred to an incident when he thought his own 18 month daughter had died as she had suffered a fit. He denied suggesting the claimant’s loss was a blessing or that she could not cope with children.

162. The claimant was asked what she meant by referring in her particulars of claim to ‘I informed EAHI’ and whether she had told the respondent before speaking with Filipe Goncalves. The claimant said in evidence that there was general chit chat in the office previously. She then corrected this and said, ‘not necessarily chit chat because of the information’ and that when she referred to EAHI she meant the office she worked in and her colleagues and that yes, she had told her colleagues in the office. She agreed that the conversation with Filipe Goncalves was in the car after they had visited a customer together because she was struggling with sales. The claimant said that she was aware of the incident of near death fit but it was ‘not my recollection’ that this was brought up during the conversation on 16 March 2023. When the claimant was asked if she was looking for support by sharing the information, the claimant was equivocal saying ‘not necessarily, potentially… just some understanding’.

163. The claimant accepts she was with Filipe Goncalves on this occasion as he was supporting her with a sale. The claimant accepts that towards the end of her time with the respondent she was struggling to sell the leads she was allocated. At paragraph 20 of her written statement, the claimant refers to asking several times for ‘watches’ – where a more experienced rep comes out and watches the appointment to help identify any issues - with Filipe Goncalves but this never materialised. I consider there is merit in the respondent’s submission that the claimant’s requests to accompany Filipe Goncalves undermine the credibility of her allegations of sustained harassment by him and was persuaded by this submission. I note my findings above regarding allegations 1-5. I consider that it is incongruous that the claimant would ask Filipe Goncalves in particular to accompany her in circumstances where the claimant says she had been subjected to repeated and frequent conduct amounting to sexual harassment by Filipe Goncalves.

164. It is also incongruous that the claimant would share personal information with a person who she says had been harassing her since the start of her engagement with the respondent or look to him for some understanding although the claimant’s evidence was that she had freely shared the information with other colleagues so is taken to be reasonably comfortable with sharing this type of information in the office. I note that this is in the context of an office where she felt sexualised by her colleagues and subjected to repeated comments of a sexual nature arguably not an environment in which it might be expected she would freely share sensitive and private information about matters related to her as a woman.

165. The claimant sets out in her written statement that the conversation left her distraught and refers to MC21 (HB 159). It is plausible that a conversation about a traumatic personal event such as miscarriages would leave someone distraught and upset and I accept this was the case for the claimant. MC21 is the claimant’s transcript of a voice message she says was sent to Dawid on 16 March 2023 referring to the conversation and that she was crying and that he had made the alleged comment about it being blessing in disguise followed by a comment that she didn’t say anything but wanted to reference that he had no idea and a man could never comprehend what it felt like. I have some concerns about the weight to place on the unverified transcripts of voice messages. I note that the respondent could have asked to listen to the voice messages and/or they could have been disclosed and made available to the tribunal. I refer to my comments above that they do not present the claimant unequivocally in a favourable light given some of the language use and I consider there is no basis to view them as entirely concocted. As evidence they are the claimant’s own version recalling conversations albeit close in time to the alleged incidents. The ‘blessing in disguise’ comment clearly stuck with the claimant as having been made. It is difficult to assess the overall context and tone of the conversation which was clearly emotionally charged given the claimant was immersed in painful memories at the time of the conversation and when recounting it thereafter which is no criticism of the claimant.

166. The key difference between the claimant and Filipe’s evidence is that he denies his response was to suggest opinion to the effect that it was a blessing in disguise and recalls the conversation as him disclosing information that was personal and sensitive to him which he considered was him being supportive in that context. The claimant did not deny awareness of the information Filipe said he had shared on this occasion but did not recall it having been shared on this occasion. To that extent, Filipe’s evidence about sharing that information cannot be regarded as entirely made up to defend himself against the allegation. I find it likely that the claimant and Filipe each remember different aspects of the overall conversation. I also accept that Filipe engaged in that conversation was seeking to be supportive and to the extent he used words to the effect of ‘blessing in disguise’ this was made innocently without intent to offend.