JUDGMENT

25 1. The claimant did not make a protected disclosure in his letter of 20 April 2024 and did not bring to his employer’s attention circumstances which were harmful to health and safety in that letter.

2. The claimant’s claims of detriment in terms of section 47B Employment Rights, Act, and automatically unfair dismissal in terms of sections 100(1)(c) 30 and 103A fail and are dismissed.

3. The claimant’s claim of unlawful deduction from wages should be listed for a 1-day hearing before an Employment Judge sitting alone in Edinburgh.

Introduction

35 1. The purpose of this hearing was to determine whether the claimant had made a protected disclosure in terms of section 43B Employment Rights Act 1996 (‘ERA’) or had satisfied the requirements of section 100(1)(c) ERA in that he

Page 2

had brought to his employer’s attention, by reasonable means, circumstances connected with his work which he reasonable believed were harmful or potentially harmful to health and safety.

2. The claimant’s position was that he had been subjected to detriments and/or 5 automatically unfairly dismissed in terms of section 100(1)(c) and/or section 103A ERA.

3. Parties provided a joint bundle of documents for this hearing, and the claimant gave evidence. Parties then made oral submissions on their respective positions.

10 Issues to determine

4. The nature of the claimant’s claims had been set out in a Note of a hearing on 6 January 2025. While the claimant subsequently successfully amended his claim following a further hearing on 3 March 2025, the Note of the hearing on 6 15 January set out the details of the matters relied upon by the claimant as amounting to protected disclosures and/or health and safety concerns in terms of section 100(1)(c) ERA. The Tribunal was therefore required to determine whether the terms of the claimant’s letter to the respondent dated 20 April 2024 which are set out below amount to protected disclosures and/or raising health 20 and safety concerns in terms of section 100(1)(c). The claimant relied on two distinct paragraphs in that letter. These were set out by the Tribunal following the hearing of 6 January in summary as follows.

i. Under the heading “Understand RAMS, working with them and at all times to protect operatives, clients and the company” that the 25 respondent had failed to provide sufficient raining regarding the use of equipment and this created a risk to the health and safety of staff and clients; and
ii. Under the heading “Taking interest and ownership of tasks and projects” that no one within the company was qualified to undertake gas work, but 30 the company was undertaking this work regardless of that fact, which created a risk to the health and safety of staff and clients.” Page 3 Findings in fact

5. Having considered the relevant documents, the evidence of the claimant, and the submissions made by the parties, the Tribunal found the following material 5 facts to have been established.

6. The claimant worked as a Ventilation Engineer for the respondent from around 16 January 2023 until his dismissal on 27 November 2024.

7. The claimant enquired of the respondent’s Managing Director how he could increase his salary and be promoted to level 2 in his role. 10 8. Mr Watson, the respondent’s Managing Director wrote to the claimant by letter dated 19 April 2024 stating that “In order for any employee to progress to the subsequent level of competency within our organisation, we require written evidence and continuous examples of each aspect of the daily duties highlighted (with bullet points) within the enclosed document. Upon receipt of 15 written examples, the management will then take time to consider this written evidence in detail before delivering a response in writing. During this process, the management will take into consideration the views of SW Enviro support staff, customers and fellow colleagues to collate an accurate case history of your continued performance to date.” The letter enclosed a further document 20 which set out nine criteria against which competency would be assessed.

9. The claimant responded to that letter on 20 April. In the letter he set out his case for promotion to level 1 although he opened the letter by suggesting that rather than looking at level 1, the respondent should consider promoting him to level 2. The claimant then went through each criterion which had been given to 25 him and set out a case as to why he met that criterion. The letter was three and a half pages long. The letter ended by indicating that claimant believed he more than met the competences of level one and asked for the competencies for level 2.

10. Under the heading “Understanding RAMS”, which is an acronym for Risk 30 Assessment Method Statement, the claimant had written the following: “Whilst I endeavour to follow RAMS and always work safety, I appreciate that at times the equipment available can either be not available or provided by the company or can be too cumbersome for the working

Page 4

area intended I therefore always strive to select and source the most appropriate equipment available form the suppliers and supplies afforded to us (the operatives). As regards protecting the company I think it is imperative that the company puts all members of staff through 5 appropriate and formal training in relation to the requirements of the RAMS such as certification for working at height from scaffolding etc. as provided by training companies such as HSS”

11. Under the heading “Taking interest and ownership of tasks and projects”, the claimant wrote: 10 “Since starting with the company and even before starting with the company I took interest in its tasks and projects hoping that one day I would be able to take full ownership of such projects. I was inspired by the opportunity to gain new qualifications within and through the company which in turn would grow the capabilities of the business in 15 terms of the services it can provide. I was promised that I could train to be a gas and refrigeration service engineer but sadly this is something that has fallen well short of my expectations. Having completed the F- Gas qualification first as requested by yourself and at my expense, with the training agreement to pay back the costs only being requested after I 20 passed I have not even been given the opportunity further my training in this field. Despite me questioning whether I could work along side the Gas engineers on the then service team to develop my skills further I was never given any feedback on that request until it became blatantly obvious that this would not happen when the self-employed engineers 25 working on behalf of the company left I presume due to the fact that the company could no longer deliver the financial reward for their services that they could seek elsewhere. That said that does not diminish my desire to develop and grow this side of the business again although that would require the financial backing of the company to undertake the 30 initial appropriate gas course to enable me to be put on the gas safe register and then the further gas course specialising in commercial kitchen appliances. A useful qualification to have with teams working in often tights and confined spaces surround by gas and electrical

Page 5

appliances, hoses and cables etc, of which could be easily ruptured at any time. Hence the need for Cat 18 training also to allow for this and the full installation of ventilation systems which the client often expects but the company must outsource to a suitable electrical company. 5 Therefore, it is not my interest or lack of ownership of tasks and projects that are the issue, but the lack of training and support provided by the company that is the issue and therefore do want this to influence your perception of any lack of interest in the work or potential work the company could deliver.” 10 12. Mr Watson replied to the claimant’s letter on 7 June indicating that the claimant had not met the required criteria to advance to level 1.

13. The claimant then responded to Mr Watson’s letter on 10 July asking for detail in writing as to the basis on which it was deemed that he had not met the criteria to advance to level 1.

Relevant law

14. Parties referred me to a number of authorities in their submissions. Sinclair v Trackwork Ltd UKEAT/129/20/00; Balfour Kilpatrick Ltd v Acheson and 20 others [2003] IRLR 683; Kilraine v Wandsworth LBC 2018 1985; Korashi v Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University Local Health Board [2012] IRLR 4; Darnton v University of Surrey [2003] ICR 615; and Carmichael v Torch Partners Corporate Finance Ltd No 2202141/15 ET. No citations were provided to me during submissions, therefore if I have not correctly identified 25 the relevant case law, this should be brought to my attention as a matter of urgency.

15. Section 43B ERA defines disclosures qualifying for protection as

(1) In this Part a “qualifying disclosure” means any disclosure of information which, in the reasonable belief of the worker making the disclosure, is made 30 in the public interest and tends to show one or more of the following—

(a) that a criminal offence has been committed, is being committed or is likely to be committed, Page 6
(b) that a person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation to which he is subject,
(c) that a miscarriage of justice has occurred, is occurring or is likely to occur, 5 (d) that the health or safety of any individual has been, is being or is likely to be endangered,
(e) that the environment has been, is being or is likely to be damaged, or
(f) that information tending to show any matter falling within any one of the preceding paragraphs has been, is being or is likely to be deliberately 10 concealed.

(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), it is immaterial whether the relevant failure occurred, occurs or would occur in the United Kingdom or elsewhere, and whether the law applying to it is that of the United Kingdom or of any other country or territory. 15 (3) A disclosure of information is not a qualifying disclosure if the person making the disclosure commits an offence by making it.

(4) A disclosure of information in respect of which a claim to legal professional privilege (or, in Scotland, to confidentiality as between client and professional legal adviser) could be maintained in legal proceedings is 20 not a qualifying disclosure if it is made by a person to whom the information had been disclosed in the course of obtaining legal advice.

(5) In this Part “the relevant failure” , in relation to a qualifying disclosure, means the matter falling within paragraphs (a) to (f) of subsection (1).

16. Section 100(1)(c) ERA provides that an employee will be unfairly dismissed if 25 the reason or if more than one, the principal reason for the dismissal is that

i. being an employee at a place where there was no such representative or safety committee, or
ii. there was such a representative or safety committee, but it was not reasonably practicable for the employee to raise the matter by those 30 means, he brought to his employer’s attention, by reasonable means, circumstances connected with his work which he reasonably believed were harmful or potentially harmful to health and safety. Page 7 Discussion and decision

17. The alleged disclosures should be considered on an individual basis.

Did the claimant’s comments about RAMS amount to a protected

5 disclosure?

18. As recognised by the parties, for a disclosure to qualify as a protected disclosure, it must in the reasonable belief of the worker be made in the public interest and tend to show that one of the six relevant failures has occurred, is 10 occurring, or is likely to occur. The failure relied upon by the claimant was that relating to health and safety.

19. The respondent’s position was in summary that the comments made by the claimant were in the context of a letter in which he was seeking to demonstrate that he had met relevant criteria for promotion and a salary increase. 15 20. The context in which a worker raises a matter will be a relevant consideration in determining whether it amounts to a protected disclosure. However, the purpose of the letter in which an alleged disclosure is made will not be the only factor to be considered. It is necessary to consider carefully the actual words used by the worker. 20 21. The claimant was essentially saying in this paragraph that the respondent should provide particular training to staff. He makes specific reference to certification for working at height. However, there is nothing in the paragraph to suggest that either he or his colleagues’ health and safety has been or is likely to be put at risk by not having been put through this training. The purpose of 25 the letter is to demonstrate the extent to which the claimant met specific criteria. In making reference to additional training, it appears to me that what the claimant is seeking to do is demonstrate how he recognises the importance of risk assessments and safety issues more generally and is suggesting a way in which this could be improved. That is very different to suggesting that there 30 is a health and safety risk at present or in the future because staff have not been through such training.

22. Although the claimant suggested in evidence that there were specific instances in which he had worked at heights, and expressed concern about this this was

Page 8

not referred to in this paragraph. The claimant’s position was that he was trying to raise concerns “subtlety”, and that the respondent would have been aware of the particular circumstances which caused the claimant concern. There were no specific circumstances referred to by the claimant which might suggest that 5 he was raising a health and safety issue. Rather he was demonstrating that he understood the importance of health and safety and was making a suggestion as to how this could be improved. There is nothing in the claimant’s comments under this heading which suggests that anyone’s health and safety is at risk. The claimant makes reference to “As regards protecting the company…” from 10 which it appears that the claimant is making reference to the specific aspect of the criterion which refers to protecting the company. He is simply making a suggestion as to improvements and not raising any specific concern.

23. In these circumstances, the paragraph under the heading “Understanding RAMS” does not amount to a protected disclosure. Do the terms of the letter under “Taking interest and ownership of tasks and projects” amount to a protected disclosure?

24. The second issue which the claimant says amounts to a protected disclosure is 20 the comments he makes under this heading in his letter of 20 April 2024. The essence of terms of this paragraph is the claimant expressing his disappointment that he has not been supported by the respondent in developing his training to become a gas and refrigeration engineer. The claimant’s position in evidence was that he and his colleagues had been 25 required to work in confined spaces surrounded by gas equipment and that this could be dangerous when they were not qualified gas engineers. That is not however what the claimant states in this letter.

25. The claimant was disappointed that the respondent had not supported him in furthering his experience, career and qualifications. The claimant’s evidence 30 suggested that he was concerned that the respondent was offering gas services when it did not have staff qualified to provide that service. However, again that is not what the letter states. The letter states that self employed engineers had been carrying out that work and that they “had left”. What the

Page 9

claimant appears to be suggesting is that by investing in him, the respondent would be able to offer a full range of services rather than rely on contractors for part of the services. That is nothing to do with health and safety issues. There is nothing whatsoever in this paragraph which suggests that the health and 5 safety of the claimant, colleagues or clients is at risk. The claimant is instead explaining why he has not developed his skills and that this is the fault of the respondent and not his.

26. There is nothing in this paragraph to suggest that the claimant has a reasonable belief that the health and safety of anyone is at risk. 10 27. In these circumstances, the content of this paragraph does not amount a protected disclosure. Did the claimant bring to the respondent’s attention circumstances he reasonably believed to be potentially harmful to health and safety?

28. The respondent accepted that they did not have a health and safety representative or committee in place and therefore it would be reasonable to bring any health and safety concerns directly to the attention of the respondent’s Managing Director. The issue in dispute was whether the terms of 20 the letter referred to above amounted to bringing to his attention health and safety concerns.

29. In the first instance the principal purpose of the letter of 20 April was to demonstrate that the claimant had met the criteria required for promotion. That however does not mean that the terms of the letter itself could not amount to 25 bringing to the respondent’s attention reasonable grounds for believing that there were circumstances harmful to health and safety at the workplace. As always, it will depend on the particular facts of the case.

30. As set out above, the paragraphs of the letter on which the claimant relies principally seek to demonstrate that he has met the criteria for promotion. The 30 issues he raises in those in paragraphs do not demonstrate that the claimant has a reasonable belief that there are circumstances at the workplace which are harmful to health and safety but set out steps the claimant recommends that the respondent take to improve its business operations. The claimant

Page 10

makes these suggestions, not because he has concerns about health and safety but because he wishes to demonstrate that he understands the importance of health and safety and ways in which the respondent can alter its practices (principally by providing him and colleagues with further training) 5 which will further improve the respondent’s approach to health and safety matters. He does this in order to demonstrate that he meets the criteria for promotion.

31. Therefore, the claimant did not bring to the respondent’s attention information in which he had reasonable grounds for believing there were circumstances 10 harmful to health and safety.

Conclusions

32. As the claimant has failed to establish that he has either made protected disclosures or brought to his employer’s attention circumstances harmful to 15 health and safety, his claims for automatically unfair dismissal and detriment must fail and are dismissed.

Further procedure

33. The claimant has a remaining claim in relation to an allegation of unlawful 20 deduction from wages and date listing letters should be sent to the parties to list a final hearing to determine that remaining claim as soon as possible. That final hearing should be listed before an Employment Judge sitting alone in the Edinburgh Tribunal for 1 day.

Entered in register: 13 May 2025

and copied to parties