EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNALS

Claimant v Respondent Mrs A Ferreira da Silva Couto Dorset HealthCare University NHS Foundation Trust Considered and determined on the papers without a hearing on 6 June 2025

By Employment Judge Rayner

STRIKE OUT JUDGMENT

1. The Respondent's application to strike out the claimant’s allegation that she was subject to detriment for whistle blowing, by the respondent providing a negative reference to the Weymouth Manor Care home, is granted.

2. The allegation made within paragraph 4.1.26 of the case management order of 14 and 15 January 2025 that the Claimant was subject to detriment for whistle blowing by the respondent providing a negative reference in respect of the claimant to the Weymouth Manor Care home is struck out.

3. The Claimant's remaining allegations, including any further allegations of detriment under paragraph 4.1.26 of the case management order, will continue and be determined at a final hearing listed for 12 days from the 19 November

Reasons

1. The Respondent applies to strike out allegation 4.1.26 of the case management order made by Employment Judge Dawson following a case management hearing and preliminary hearing on the 14 and 15 January 2025.

2. The allegation made by the Claimant was that the Respondent had given references in respect of the Claimant which applied to a final written warning.

3. The strikeout application was not addressed and, on the 17 May 2025, wrote to the employment tribunal seeking determination of their application on the papers and again copying their correspondence to the Claimant.

4. The thrust of the Respondent's application is that the Claimant has no reasonable prospect of proving one of the matters she refers to in her ET1, and that therefore any claim in respect of the reference allegedly given to Weymouth Manor care home should be struck out.

5. The parties have provided a number of documents to the tribunal some of which all copies of references which the Respondent did provide and which do make reference to the Claimant having received a final written warning.

6. The Respondents application is specific and in relation to the allegation made by the Claimant that the Respondent gave a negative reference to Weymouth Manor care home and that as a result the Claimant had a job offer withdrawn.

7. The Respondent asserts that on the Claimant's own pleaded case, there is no evidence that the reason why the Claimant was not offered work was a negative reference because there is positive evidence stated by the Weymouth Manor care home that the reason the Claimant was not offered work was because there had been a restructuring and the care home no longer needed to recruit to the position the Claimant had applied for.

8. The Respondent asserts in its ET3, as amended following the 14/15 February hearing that it had never received a reference request from Weymouth Manor care home for the Claimant and has not provided a reference request for her.

9. The Claimant did not respond to the initial application but has now responded, stating that she does not agree that this part of her claim should be struck out. She does not address the specific matters raised by the Respondent in their application.

10. I have reminded myself of the key legal principles when considering strikeout of a claim in advance of a final hearing. They can be summarised as follows.

Legal Principles

11. The law is helpfully summarised in Hussain v UPS UKEAT/0221/17/DM

19. The power to strike out an ET claim is provided by Rule 37 of Schedule 1 of the 2013 Rules, which allows that an ET may strike out all or part of a claim on the basis that it has no reasonable prospect of success. This is, for example, to be contrasted with an ET’s power to order that an allegation or argument may only be pursued upon the payment of a deposit, which requires that the ET consider that the allegation or argument in question has little reasonable prospect of success.

20. In Ezsias v North 1126 CA, Lord Justice Maurice Kay stated as follows: “29. … It would only be in an exceptional case that an application to an employment tribunal will be struck out as having no reasonable prospect of success when the central facts are in dispute. An example might be where the facts sought to be established by the Claimant were totally and inexplicably inconsistent with the undisputed contemporaneous documentation. …”

21. Guidance was further provided by the EAT in Balls v Downham Market High School & College [2011] IRLR 217 at paragraph 6. “6. Where strike out is sought or contemplated on the ground that the claim has no reasonable prospects of success … the tribunal must first consider whether, on a careful consideration of all the available material, it can properly conclude that the claim has no reasonable prospects of success. I stress the word ‘no’ because it shows that the test is not whether the Claimant’s claim is likely to fail nor is it a matter of asking whether it is possible that his claim will fail. Nor is it a test which can be satisfied by considering what is put forward by the Respondent either in the ET3 or in submissions and deciding whether their written or oral assertions regarding disputed matters are likely to be established as facts. It is, in short, a high test. There must be no reasonable prospects.” (Original emphasis)

22. More specifically, in Tayside Public Transport Co Ltd t/a Travel Dundee v Reilly [2012] IRLR 755 CS, it was noted that in almost every case the decision in an unfair dismissal claim is fact-sensitive, and it was further observed that: “30. … where the central facts are in dispute, a claim should be struck out only in the most exceptional circumstances. Where there is a serious dispute on the crucial facts, it is not for the

tribunal to conduct an impromptu trial of the facts …”

23. And further, where there is a dispute as to the reason for the dismissal, it has been stated that it would be very rare indeed that the dispute could be resolved without hearing from the party or parties who actually made the decision (per Langstaff J in Romanowska v Aspirations Care Ltd UKEAT/0015/14 at paragraph 15). As for discrimination cases, it has been recognised that involving, as they do, an investigation as to why an employer took a particular step, they will generally (allowing for the exceptional case) Whilst there is no ban on striking out a discrimination claim at an early stage, there is a public interest in such claims being heard (Ukegheson v Haringey London Borough Council [2015] ICR 1285, para 4).

12. In Ahir v British Airways [2017] EWCA Civ 1392, the Court of Appeal gave the following guidance 16. 16.There is force in Mr Burns's point. Employment tribunals should not be deterred from striking out claims, including discrimination claims, which involve a dispute of fact if they are satisfied that there is indeed no reasonable prospect of the facts necessary to liability being established, and also provided they are keenly aware of the danger of reaching such a conclusion in circumstances where the full evidence has not been heard and explored, perhaps particularly in a discrimination context. …As I already said, in a case of this kind, where there is on the face of it a straightforward and well-documented innocent explanation for what occurred, a case cannot be allowed to proceed on the basis of a mere assertion that that explanation is not the true explanation without the Claimant being able to advance some basis, even if not yet provable, for that being so. The employment judge cannot be criticised for deciding the application to strike out on the basis of the actual case being advanced.

13. Ahir was considered in Kaul v Ministry of Justice [2023] EAT 41 which also highlighted the importance of considering whether the acts complained of were on their face rationally and plausibly explained and whether there is any background material which tends to undermine that explanation. It also emphasised that at a strike-out stage there is a risk that any conclusion that there is no reasonable prospect of success on a material matter of fact will be premature and a risk that something might emerge later in the litigation which wrong-foots what at the time of the strike-out application appears to be obvious.

Conclusion

14. The Claimant's allegation is that she was subjected to detriment by the provision of a poor reference because she was a whistleblower. The Claimant also makes allegations of race and religious discrimination.

15. In respect of any specific allegation, the burden is on the Claimant to prove facts, which demonstrate in the detriment case that she was subject to the detriment which she alleges. In a discrimination claim, she would need to prove that she was treated in the way alleged and that such treatment was unfavourable or less favourable for example.

16. The point the Respondent makes is that on the basis of the evidence now available, following disclosure of documents, there is no evidence to support the Claimant’s factual assertion that a negative reference was ever given and positive evidence produced by the Claimant herself, to suggest the contrary.

17. Considering that evidence and taking the claimants case at its highest, I conclude that the Claimant could only succeed if she were able to point to the Respondent being dishonest about having been asked for and having provided a reference and if she could prove that the care home was also being dishonest about the reason why they did not offer her a job. I conclude, taking into account the letter written by the care home, and the lack of any reference from the Respondent, there is , in my judgment , no reasonable prospect of the claimant being able to prove such facts, or any facts from which it might be inferred. This is a case where I conclude that the facts asserted by the claimant are inexplicably in conflict with contemporaneous documentation.

18. I agree with the Respondent that at this stage in proceedings, having clarified the issues and following disclosure of documentation , the relevant parts of which I have been referred to and which the Claimant has had an opportunity to comment on, there is no reasonable prospect of the Claimant being able to satisfy an employment tribunal in respect of this particular allegation.

19. In reaching this conclusion I take into account the fact that there or a number of other references from the Respondent which do clearly state that the Claimant had a final written warning for misconduct on her file, and it is therefore difficult to see why the Respondent would not disclose references written in respect of any other reference request.

20. Rule 38 of the Employment Tribunal Procedure Rules 2024 provides that a tribunal may strike out a part of a claim or response at any stage of proceedings either on its own initiative or an application of the parties on the grounds that it has no reasonable prospects of success. The tribunal may not strike out unless the party in question has been given a reasonable opportunity to make representations in writing or if requested by a party at a hearing.

21. I am satisfied that the Claimant has been given reasonable opportunities to make representations in writing and that she has done so and that neither party have requested a hearing.

22. I conclude that the Claimant has no reasonable prospect of succeeding improving that she was subject to detriment by the Respondent giving a negative reference to the Weymouth Manor Care Home, and I therefore strike out that allegation only, under rule 38 ETPR 2024.

23. To be clear and for the avoidance of doubt any other allegation made by the Claimant that she was subject to detriment by the provision of a negative reference which is covered by allegation 4.1.26, remains alive allegation and will be determined by the employment tribunal in November/December 2025.