JUDGMENT

The claim is struck out under rule 38 of the Employment Tribunal Procedure Rules 2024 on the ground that it has no reasonable prospect of success.

REASONS

1. I have written my decision and reasons in as much plain English as I am able. The claimant is neurodiverse by reason of autism and refuses to read documents if they contain legal terminology. He refers to them as “gibberish”. I have included a section at the end of the judgment that is in as plain a form of English as possible. He will hopefully understand the practical consequences of the decision by reading the end section, but if he and the respondents want to understand how the law has been applied to the parties’ arguments, the whole of the reasons will need to be read.

2. This claim was begun by the claimant approaching ACAS to begin early conciliation against both respondents on 16 February 2024, which lasted until 29 March 2024. The claimant sent a claim form to the Tribunal on 17 May 2024 in which he alleged that both respondents had discriminated against him by reason of his belief in ethical veganism.

3. The discrimination was said to have taken the form of neither respondent making an ethical vegan pension fund available to the claimant at the time he was employed by the first respondent. He says that this is indirect discrimination on the grounds of his belief in ethical veganism. In the claim form, the claimant asked that the Tribunal award compensation for lost employer pension contributions plus interest plus compensation for any tax advantage lost and also that the Tribunal make recommendations that the respondents be required to facilitate a vegan suitable pension provision, or alternatively provide a tax- efficient payment in lieu, or an appropriate third party vegan-suitable pension.

4. The claimant noted that the second respondent was the largest pension scheme in the country and that although vegans are approximately 2% of the population, that nevertheless related to approximately 10,000 members of the second respondent’s pension scheme. The claimant drew a comparison with the second respondent’s Sharia pension fund, which according to him had approximately “0.047%” of the second respondent’s pension fund’s total assets.

5. It is the respondents’ case that the claim is misconceived and has no reasonable prospect of success.

6. There was a case management preliminary hearing before Employment Judge Cookson on 16 December 2024. At this hearing, the claims were discussed, and the matter was listed for a one-day public hearing to consider the respondents’ applications for strike out of the claim, or deposit orders in the alternative. This was the hearing before me that is the subject of this judgment. Also considered by me was the claimant’s application for an anonymity order under Rule 49 Employment Tribunal Rules of Procedure 2024 (“ET Rules”), which was granted to him in a judgment which was sent to the parties on 4 December 2025.

7. The factual background to the case is that the claimant was employed by the first respondent from 6 June 2023 to 18 January 2024, and at the start of his employment he was auto-enrolled in the second respondent’s pension scheme. Very shortly after this, the claimant objected to the terms of the second respondent’s scheme and opted out of it. He was treated as if he had never been a member of the scheme. It is the claimant’s case that he is not able to join the USS scheme on the basis of his ethical veganism, because the USS makes investment decisions which he and other vegans cannot accept.

8. The respondents have applied under Rule 38 of the ET Rules that the Tribunal strike out the claim on the ground that it has no reasonable prospect of success. Alternatively they have applied under rule 39 ET Rules that the claimant be required to pay a deposit to be allowed to continue with his claim, on the basis that the claim has little reasonable prospect of success. As I have struck out the claim, I have not dealt with the application for a deposit order as this was not necessary.

9. At the hearing on 18 July 2025 I heard argument from the claimant and both respondents. All parties also discussed the claimant’s application for anonymity. The respondents had provided written submissions in support of their applications. The claimant was given the chance to make further submissions in writing after the end of the hearing, which the second respondent replied to. The claimant’s refusal to engage with legal language, concepts and terminology

10. The claimant had refused to engage with the respondents’ submissions, and he objected to the presentation of an authorities bundle. Although this is the claimant’s third ET claim, he still considers the use of legal terms, legal argument and case authorities to be offensive and objectionable, on the basis that these are not written in plain English. The claimant is in his manner and presentation an articulate and thoughtful individual and my understanding of his objections is not that he would not be unable to follow a legal argument, but that he objects to it because it is not something that he is readily and straightforwardly able to follow.

11. Courts and Tribunals are not the only area of society where technical language is used; science and technology and medicine are examples of disciplines where some use of non-plain English is necessary, in order to describe situations, phenomena and concepts with enough clarity and precision to allow those disciplines properly to function. Law is the same. Parties are required to co- operate with the Tribunal to ensure that claims are dealt with effectively. Plain English is to be used wherever possible, but I reminded the claimant that on occasion, plain English can over-simplify a technical concept so as to remove the specific meaning or classification associated with that concept and necessary for it to be properly understood. On occasion it is therefore unavoidable, although it is possible to translate legal terminology so that a lay person can follow what is being said. In relation to these claims, the legal arguments are highly technical. The Tribunal cannot simply avoid engaging with such technical arguments without undermining the fairness of any decision. The claimant was urged to engage with the respondents’ arguments also, with little success during the hearing. His written submissions after the hearing ended did engage with the legal arguments made.

12. This is particularly an issue in this case, as the issues in relation to the respondents’ applications are more legal than factual. Also, indirect discrimination is a notoriously difficult and technically complex area of the Equality Act 2010. The second respondent’s submissions to this hearing were particularly technical and presented in legal language, despite the parties’ awareness of the claimant’s neurodiversity and strong preference for plain English. I therefore asked the second respondent’s counsel to pause periodically during his submissions so that I could “translate” what was being said into plain English so far as was possible. The parties’ arguments on whether the claim has no reasonable prospect of success

13. Applications for a strike-out of a claim under rule 38 ET Rules are made on the basis that a claim has no reasonable prospect of success at a final hearing. To assess this, the claimant’s case must be taken at its highest. Therefore, the question for the Tribunal is if the claimant succeeds in persuading the Tribunal to find in his favour on any disputed issues, or matters of evidence, what would his chances be of winning based on the legal tests to be applied.

14. The Tribunal is told to be very careful in striking out cases, particularly where discrimination is alleged. It is only where cases are essentially hopeless, that is, have no reasonable prospect of success, that they should be struck out (Anyanwu v South Bank Student’s Union [2001] IRLR 305, HL.) This is because it is not in the interests of justice to allow cases that are clearly hopeless to proceed to a final hearing, taking up Tribunal time and resources. The background facts and issues for the Tribunal to decide.

15. As noted by the first respondent, by law every employer in the UK must automatically enrol eligible job holders into a workplace pension scheme and contribute to it (because of s3 Pensions Act 2008). The first respondent uses the second respondent’s Universities Superannuation Scheme (“the Scheme”) to fulfil that requirement.

16. The second respondent is the corporate trustee of the Scheme which is the largest private sector occupational pension scheme in the UK, of approximately £78 billion. It is governed by a trust deed and trust rules of 19 November 2015 (“the Rules”) and is a hybrid pension scheme which provides defined benefit and defined contribution pension benefits within the one trust. Members therefore accrue separate benefits from the one scheme.

17. USS Investment Management Limited (“USSIM”) is a subsidiary of the second respondent and is the principal investment manager and adviser to the Scheme and oversees the investment and management of the Scheme’s assets.

18. As the first respondent is a participating employer of the Scheme, it has to comply with the exclusivity provisions in the Rules, which means that it cannot both participate in the Scheme and also participate in, or offer, another pension scheme to eligible employees.

19. As the claim is one of indirect discrimination against ethical vegans, the Tribunal at a final hearing will consider what the practice of the respondents was that put ethical vegans, including the claimant, at a particular disadvantage when compared with those who are not ethical vegans. The practice identified by the claimant is that the second respondent “makes non-ethical investment decisions”. The claimant asks that the second respondent be required to provide a vegan-suitable alternative, “at the very least for the defined contribution but also for the defined benefit.” During the hearing the claimant appeared to limit his requirement for a vegan suitable alternative to the defined contribution part of the scheme only, for the first time in the proceedings.

The second respondent’s application for strike out

20. Taking the second respondent’s application first, it argues that s191 Equality Act 2010 when read in combination with Schedule 22 paragraph 1(1) of that Act mean that a person is deemed to have not discriminated against another person if it is doing anything it has to do because of a “requirement of an enactment”. The second respondent’s case is that it is required by s36 Pensions Act 1995 (the Pensions Act being the “enactment” and section 36 being the “requirement” in question) to exercise its investment powers in line with the Occupational Pension Schemes (Investment) Regulations 2005.

21. The Occupational Pension Schemes (Investment) Regulations 2005 at Regulation 4 essentially oblige trustees to invest in assets in the best interests of members and beneficiaries, and where there is a potential conflict of interest, in the sole interest of members and beneficiaries. Their investment decisions must be made to ensure the “security, quality, liquidity and profitability of the portfolio as a whole”.

22. Therefore, taking these provisions together, trustees are obliged to invest and secure the trust assets in the best financial interests of the members and beneficiaries – this is what is meant by the “security, quality, liquidity and profitability of the portfolio as a whole”. As they are required to do so by law (by the requirement of an enactment”), Schedule 22 of the Equality Act 2010 means that they cannot be acting in a discriminatory way in relation to (in this case) employees by following the requirements of the Pensions Act 1995 and the Occupational Pension Schemes (Investment) Regulations 2005.

23. The second respondent acknowledges that there are limited circumstances in which trustees may consider non-financial factors (and even then they are not obliged to consider the non-financial factors). Two things must be present for them to consider non-financial factors – the first is that the trustees must have good reasons for thinking that all scheme members share the non-financial concern (Butler-Sloss v Charity Commission [2022] Ch 371) and the second is that there would be no significant risk of a financial disadvantage as a result of the non- financial factors being considered (Harries v Church Commissioners for England [1992] 1 WLR 1241).

24. Taking the claimant’s case at its highest, he puts the number of vegans eligible for the Scheme at about 2%, based on the prevalence of vegans in the general population. He has conducted his own survey which demonstrates that vegans he has been able to speak to are very concerned about the compatibility of their pension funds with ethical veganism. That demonstrates that ethical vegans (i.e. the circa 2% identified) are concerned. Even if this were to be extrapolated to the whole of the pension scheme, and even if it were to be multiplied four-fold to allow for any population variation (that is, more vegans amongst those who work for universities and therefore more vegans amongst those eligible to join the Scheme) this is still far from meeting the standard required that all scheme members share their concern.

25. Also, the claimant admitted that there exists no ethical vegan pension fund at present. They are in the process of being established. It is therefore not possible for the second respondent, even if it felt able to, to offer employees the chance to invest in such a scheme as none currently exist. It would therefore be impossible to calculate how financially risky such a scheme may be, and therefore impossible to satisfy the other test for non-financial concerns to be taken into account which is that the non-financial factor would not cause a significant risk of financial detriment. (Harries v Church Commissioners for England [1992] 1 WLR 1241).

26. I therefore conclude that the case against the second respondent has no reasonable prospect of success. The second respondent does not discriminate (so far as the Equality Act is concerned) against the claimant or other ethical vegans by following the provisions of the Pensions Act 1995 and the Occupational Pension Schemes (Investment) Regulations 2005. It must follow these provisions. The very limited circumstances in which it may choose to depart from financial concerns have no reasonable prospect of being established in the claimant’s case.

27. For completeness, I also agree with the second respondent that “ethical” and “non-ethical” investment decisions are not clearly understood or universally agreed terms, but are value judgments that mean vastly different things to different people. This is therefore not a neutral “practice” or “provision” capable of being a PCP as is required by an indirect discrimination claim.

28. Finally, I also agree with the second respondent that auto-enrolment in a pension scheme by them is not a PCP that was “applied” to the claimant. As soon as an individual such as the claimant becomes an employee of the first respondent, they are automatically enrolled because of the Pensions Act 2008. This is not the application of a PCP by the second respondent and so the second respondent cannot be liable for indirect discrimination.

The first respondent’s application for strike out

29. The first respondent applies on the basis that the claim is primarily out of time in that the claimant opted out in July 2023 but did not approach ACAS until 16 February 2024 and presented his claim on 24 May 2024. His claim is therefore substantially outside the three-month time limit and I agree with the first respondent that the relevant date from which time should run should be July 2023, not as an ongoing act (as the claimant alleges), in that he says he had to implicitly opt-out with every pay cheque. It is not an ongoing act, but an act with ongoing consequences and so time starts to run from the date of opt-out, not the date of the last of the monthly consequences.

30. However, it would be possible for the Tribunal to consider whether to allow the claimant an extension of time to bring his claims on a “just and equitable” basis. Part of any such consideration involves the Tribunal looking at the potential merits of the case, as there is no point in extending time if a claim is bound to fail.

31. Considering the merits of the claim against the first respondent, they state that the justification defence will be made out. Therefore, the claim is bound to fail. This is because the Scheme allows a binary choice only – universities must use the Scheme only for their employees or not use the Scheme at all. It is not possible to offer pension provisions to employees using any other schemes or else none of the university staff would be able to use the Scheme. Leaving aside the separate point as to whether ethical vegan pension schemes exist at present, the first respondent says that denying approximately 98% of its staff the benefit of enrolling in the Scheme to satisfy the approximately 2% of vegans who may want a different scheme is not a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. Even then, the first respondent’s Equality Impact Assessment results suggest that some of the first respondent’s employees who are ethical vegans do not share the claimant’s objections to the Scheme investment policies and therefore the proportion of affected employees may be even smaller than 2%.

32. The first respondent points to the benefit to its staff of membership of the Scheme, given the size of the Scheme and its affordability to the first respondent. It was said during the hearing that “the first respondent could not prudently go anywhere else than the second respondent” for its workplace pension provision.

The claimant’s reply to the respondents’ applications

33. The claimant has conducted his own survey and has obtained a statistician’s letter as evidence. However, the statistician’s letter is not limited to university employees and so does not assist in showing group disadvantage amongst those who are members of the Scheme. The claimant has also requested that the respondents provide statistical information as to why people (either from the first respondent’s workforce or from the second respondent’s Scheme membership) opt out or move away from the Scheme. The data disclosed by both respondents does not assist him - in fact it appears to show that only the claimant has left the scheme because of ethical veganism. Also the survey conducted privately by him does not assist in showing group disadvantage to ethical vegans amongst the first respondent’s workforce in that it asks the question of members of the public whether they want a “plant based pension”. This is not the same as asking whether members of the first respondent’s staff feel unable to participate in the Scheme.

34. The claimant has researched whether any “plant based” or other schemes suitable for ethical vegans are available. They are currently not. What is available is a SIPP, a self-invested personal pension fund, but this would offend the Scheme exclusivity rule. The claimant speculates as to whether a suitable fund may become available in the future and referred to the “VEGM” fund that would appear to be in development. However, even if his claim is limited to the defined benefit part of the Scheme, if no such fund existed at the time he was an employee of the first respondent it is impossible to see how such a fund could have been offered to him, or how (even if they had the discretion to) the trustees could have devised such a scheme for him to use.

35. The claimant was given time after the hearing concluded to respond to the point made by the respondents about Schedule 22 of the Equality Act 2010. He provided me with a set of written arguments, which I have considered. The second respondent provided a short reply, which I have also considered. The claimant argues that the second respondent, because its trustees had some discretion (i.e. in the limited circumstances set out above) then the “defence” in Schedule 22 falls away. Respectfully I do not agree with this interpretation. The discretion that the second respondent’s trustees have is extremely limited, as is described above.

36. The claimant relies on s61 Equality Act 2010 in his reply, and London Fire Commissioner and others v Sargeant and others [2021] All ER 75 where it was held that schedule 22 of the Act did not provide the employer with a defence to the employees’ claims for age discrimination in the operation of the pension scheme. This held that if there are provisions in the pension scheme which oblige them to act in a discriminatory way, s61 is to be prioritised as an obligation over those other provisions in the pension scheme such that the discriminatory provisions do not apply.

37. However, the application of s61 is not as straightforward as this in the claimant’s case. There is no provision of the Scheme that requires the trustees to commit an act of discrimination against ethical vegans and furthermore, the claimant’s request is that the trustees create an alternative pension scheme that is outside the trustees’ powers in the existing scheme. Finally, the requirement of the Scheme that the trustees prioritise financial matters over non-financial matters is not something that equates to an act of discrimination against ethical vegans per se.

38. The claimant refers to the existence of the Sharia fund demonstrating the “feasibility…. of offering funds that conform to belief-based criteria, removing practical escape routes R1 and R2 might otherwise allege”.

39. The Sharia fund is only part of the smaller defined contribution part of the Scheme offered by the second respondent which is comprised of several existing schemes already available on the general investment market and selected by the second respondent to be offered as an “Investment Builder” option as part of the defined contribution element of the scheme.

40. Furthermore, the ability of the second respondent to offer a vegan-suitable scheme is dependent on the fact that there is simply no vegan pension scheme available on the market for the second respondent to offer and the second respondent does not, as part of its function, create defined contribution schemes to offer to members. It would therefore not be able to offer an existing vegan scheme (as there are none) nor create one itself. The “feasibility” of offering such a fund is therefore an entirely theoretical concept at present. The claimant says “I am asking that the Trustees set up a fund to meet my needs”. This is not part of their function.

41. Finally, the second respondent notes, if the claimant’s complaints are now limited to the failure to provide a vegan pension as part of the defined contribution element of the scheme, any disadvantage by such a failure could have been avoided by the claimant by withdrawing his contributions to the “Investment Builder” part of the scheme (the defined contribution element) and by leaving his contributions in the defined benefit section of the scheme, to which he does not now appear to object.

42. The claimant told me that the key point in this case was not statistical evidence, or legal argument, but “the morality of the issue”. I told him, and I repeat that here for the record, that this is not the primary consideration. The Tribunal must apply the law as it currently stands, not as a claimant may wish it to be. If the claimant wishes to see a change in the law, it is for him to approach his MP or consider another way of influencing those who make the law.

Summary and conclusion – in plain English

43. As the law currently stands, and as I must apply it, the claim has no reasonable prospect of success as against the first respondent or the second respondent. It is therefore struck out. It has no hope of success. I understand that the claimant feels very strongly about this issue. That is unfortunately not of itself a strong enough reason to reach a different conclusion about how the law applies to his case.

44. The Scheme does not provide a vegan fund as part of the defined contribution “Investment Builder” section. This is because one does not currently exist, and the trustees’ function does not include setting up pension schemes as part of the Investment Builder section.

45. In relation to the first respondent, to offer the claimant a vegan pension scheme or the ability to invest himself (through a SIPP) would mean that none of the rest of the first respondent’s staff would be able to join the Scheme, due to the exclusivity rule in the Scheme rules. The first respondent’s evidence suggests that the claimant is the only member of its staff to have withdrawn from the Scheme due to ethical veganism. Taking his case at its highest, even if there are 2% or more members of the first respondent’s staff who think as he does and withdraw from the Scheme because it is not suitable for vegans, it is still a disproportionate measure to exclude the other 98% or so of the workforce on that basis. There is therefore no reasonable prospect of him being able to establish that the first respondent’s continued enrolment of staff into the Scheme, despite the lack of a vegan suitable scheme, was unreasonable (that is “not a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim”).

46. In relation to the second respondent, its investment duties in relation to the Scheme are heavily prescribed by law and its discretion is very narrow and limited. The circumstances in which trustees may consider non-financial factors in investment decisions do not arise in the claimant’s case. If they are acting in accordance with statutory obligations (as they are in the Scheme’s case), they cannot be acting in a discriminatory manner due to the operation of Schedule 22 of the Equality Act 2010. Furthermore, no vegan-suitable fund is offered as part of the Investment Builder section of the Scheme as no such fund exists, and the trustees’ function does not extend to creating pension schemes from scratch.

47. The case is therefore dismissed.