JUDGMENT OF THE EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL

The judgment of the Tribunal is that the claimant was a disabled person under the Equality Act 2010 from 4 November 2024 until 5 March 2025.

ORDERS OF THE EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL

1. The claimant’s application to include a claim for failure to make reasonable adjustments, as set out in section 11 of his email of 2 September 2025, is granted.

2. The respondent will have until 29 October 2025 to provide an amended ET3 to the Tribunal, copied to the claimant.

3. Paragraph 7 of the Tribunal order of 26 June 2025 is varied, by agreement, to 29 October 2025.

REASONS

Introduction

1. Mr Morgan has brought claims for arrears of pay and holiday pay, unfair dismissal for asserting a statutory right, victimisation and disability

discrimination

2. At a case management preliminary hearing on 26 June 2025, Judge Robison identified the disability discrimination claims were a claim of direct discrimination under section 13 of the Equality Act 201 ( the Equality Act) and

8001010/2025 and others Page 2

a claim of discrimination arising from disability under section 15, specifically that the claimant suffered unfavourable treatment because the respondent failed to follow procedures and by being dismissed. The “something arising” was being off sick with anxiety due to the respondent’s failure to pay wages.

3. Judge Robison confirmed in her note that the impairments relied on were stress, anxiety and depression. A preliminary hearing was listed to consider “disability status” and a final hearing listed for 5-7 November.

4. Relevant for this hearing, Judge Robison ordered that by 7 August 2025, the claimant should send to the respondent and the Tribunal: medical records/and or a medical report and a disability impact statement, setting out how his impairment impacts on his day to day activities.

5. No medical records or report were provided in compliance with that order.

6. A disability impact statement was presented on 15 September 2025.

7. A letter was provided shortly before the hearing by email to the tribunal and the respondent. This was from the claimant’s GP and dated from 16 July 2018. It confirmed that he was diagnosed in January 2017 with depression and has been attending his GP, psychiatrist and community psychiatric nurse. It also confirms he was at that time on antidepressant (escitalopram) and had previously been prescribed other medication.

8. Mr Cormack did not object to that document being added to the bundle. However, when the claimant arrived at the hearing, he had additional paper documents with him that appeared to be some kind of medical documents. I adjourned to allow these documents to be shared with Mr Cormack and for him to take instructions. When the hearing resumed, Mr Cormack objected to the documents being included as he had not been able to take proper instructions. I was conscious that the claimant has indicated he has a difficulty complying with timelines and was concerned he may be disadvantaged if the documents were not before me. Equally, the respondent had not had proper notice of them. I suggested adjourning today’s hearing to the final hearing for the issue of disability to be determined there. Ultimately, Mr Morgan indicated he would prefer to continue today and he didn’t think the documents added anything.

9. I heard evidence from Mr Morgan. I took him through his disability impact statement and asked some additional questions. I explained that I was considering whether he was disabled at the relevant time. I could not take into account information about his condition after that time although the disability impact statement referenced his current condition. Mr Cormack then cross- examined him. Evidence was led for the respondent from Mr Gary Maguire, who had been the claimant’s line manager and who had daily contact with

8001010/2025 and others Page 3

him. The respondent provided a bundle of documents and parties had an opportunity to make submissions.

Findings in fact

10. I make the following findings in fact:

11. The claimant has suffered from mental health since childhood.

12. He was diagnosed with depression and anxiety in 2017 and was managed for a period of time by a psychiatrist and a mental health team as a well as by his GP.

13. He was admitted to a psychiatric ward in 2018 for 5 weeks following a period of self-harming and suicide attempts.

14. He was prescribed antidepressants in 2018 and continued to take these until 2020. He stopped taking these during the pandemic as he didn’t feel they were making a difference. He has not taken medication since then.

15. His symptoms have continued from that period to the relevant period. These include:

• A lack of interest in eating, often needing to be reminded to eat. He lives on microwave meals and sandwiches.
• Difficulty with maintaining personal hygiene and washing clothes, sometimes just buying a new shirt instead of washing one. He had 40 polo shirts that he wore when working for the respondent. He would often spend the day in his dressing gown, needing prompting to shower.
• Since childhood, he has had difficulty in socialising. He does not have friends and, outside of school or work, spends most of his time at home in his bedroom. Since COVID he has had some limited social engagement online.
• Over the last 4 years he has suffered agoraphobic symptoms. He is unable to use public transport due to resulting panic attacks and can only shop in a local shop to which he drives by car. Sometimes he sits in the car in the dark, is unable to go into the shop and then drives home.

16. When working, he is able to mask his symptoms. During his time with the respondent, he worked as a mail sorter and primarily as a mail porter. He worked night shifts. He drove to the facility and was always on time. Although he was part of a team, he primarily worked on his own loading and unloading

8001010/2025 and others Page 4

vehicles and receiving mail. He was considered an excellent worker who followed instructions to the letter and was also proactive in anticipating what needed to be done. He had to be reminded to take breaks. worked almost every day as overtime was available and was never absent. However, when he returned home, he spent his non-working time in his room and did not socialise. He continued to lack interest in food , to struggle with personal hygiene and to experience agoraphobic symptoms.

17. His self-harming has left him with scars on both arms so he wears long sleeves.

Observations on the evidence

18. I found the claimant’s evidence to be honest and compelling. Although he had not provided medical information, beyond a historic note from his GP, he was candid that he had not seen a doctor recently and that he had stopped taking medication in 2020 as it didn’t seem to help his symptoms. He explained that he was able to mask his symptoms while at work and that the routine of a job was helpful for his condition. His evidence was almost entirely about how his condition impacted on him in his personal life. These were not matters that a doctor, or indeed his employer, were able to comment on or dispute.

19. Mr Maguire also gave an honest account. From his perspective there were “no issues” and he described the claimant as the “best worker he had come across”. However, he could not comment on the effects experienced by the claimant outside work. He did confirm that the claimant needed to be reminded to take breaks.

20. Mr Cormack drew my attention to the fact that the claimant had not mentioned his disability in various of the respondent’s documents including his CV. I do not consider this is significant. It is not surprising that a employee, or prospective employee, does not bring his condition to an employer’s attention. This is especially so when the person is able to mask his condition and function effectively in the workplace.

21. In his evidence, and in his disability impact statement, the claimant said that he struggled to plan and organise himself and that he got mixed up with dates and times. That did not accord with the evidence from Mr Maguire that he was able to carry out instructions and attended work every day and was punctual. I do not find that that effect has been established in this hearing although I do not suggest that the claimant was not honest about that.

Relevant law

22. Under the Equality Act, section 6, a person has a disability if that person has “a physical or mental impairment” which has a “substantial and long-term

8001010/2025 and others Page 5

adverse effect” on their ability to carry out “normal day-to-day activities”’ — S.6(1). The burden of proof is on the claimant to show that he or she satisfies this definition.

23. A “substantial” effect means more than minor or trivial. Unless an effect is minor or trivial, it is substantial.

24. Tribunals should focus on what the person cannot do ( or can only do with difficulty) rather than what they can do.

25. Schedule 1 Paragraph 2(1) provides that the effect is “long-term” if (a) it has lasted for at least 12 months, (b) it is likely to last for at least 12 months, or (c) it is likely to last for the rest of the life of the person affected.

26. Schedule 1 para 2(2) provides that if an impairment ceases to have a substantial adverse effect on a person's ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities, it is to be treated as continuing to have that effect if that effect is likely to recur. “Likely to recur” in this context means it “could well happen”.

27. The Tribunal, when carrying out its assessment, must disregard events taking place after the alleged discriminatory act ( McDougall v Richmond Adult Community College 2008 ICR 431.) and must ask what was the likelihood of the substantial adverse effect recurring at the time of the alleged discrimination.

Discussion and decision

28. I have considered the question of disability between 4 November 2024, when the claimant started work for the respondent in Prestwick until 5 March 2025, the latest possible date of dismissal.

29. The EAT gave guidance in Goodwin v Patent Office [1999] IRLR 4 as to the correct approach. Tribunals should look at the evidence by reference to four different questions:

(i) did the claimant have a mental and/or physical impairment?
(ii) did the impairment affect the claimant’s ability to carry out normal day- to-day activities?
(iii) was the adverse effect substantial? and
(iv) was the adverse effect long term?

30. I will structure my decision accordingly.

8001010/2025 and others Page 6

Did the claimant have a mental impairment at the relevant time?

31. Mr Cormack submitted that the claimant had not established he had an impairment. He does not dispute that the claimant has scars from historic self- harm. However, the respondent relies on the fact that there is no medical evidence for the relevant time. The respondent’s documents regarding fitness for work said he was fit for work and did not suggest further assessment was required. Mr Cormack suggested that any stress and anxiety was a reaction to events as he perceived them at work.

32. I am not persuaded by these submissions. The claimant’s evidence was convincing. While medical evidence may be helpful, it is not an absolute requirement and the claimant’s evidence was of a condition that had existed for many years. He gave cogent evidence that he had, in the past, been diagnosed with the condition and had been admitted to a psychiatric ward. He had provided photographs of his scars form self-harm that were not disputed. His clear evidence was that the symptoms he described were ongoing throughout the whole period. The symptoms may have been aggravated by the claimant’s perception of what had happened at work, but I am satisfied that there was an underlying cause of depression and anxiety.

33. I do not consider that the claimant suffers from an impairment of “stress” although this may have aggravated his symptoms from time to time. .

34. I conclude that the claimant , at the relevant time had a mental impairment of anxiety and depression . Did that impairment affect the claimant’s ability to carry out normal day-to day activities?

35. The respondent relied on evidence from Mr Maguire that the claimant had been an exceptionally good worker. He was able to follow instructions, arrived on time and did not have a day off. However, the focus is not on what the claimant could do, but what he could not do. The claimant’s evidence was that he had been unable to socialise, struggled with personal hygiene and washing clothes. He was not able to cook, beyond a microwave meal or sandwiches. He was unable to use public transport. Although he could mask his condition at work, it was relevant that he stressed that his job was routine and largely solitary. He was able to drive there. Mr Maguire confirmed that although part of a team, the claimant’s duties were largely performed on his own. The issues of socialising, hygiene, cooking and transport continued outside work.

36. I consider that the depression and anxiety did affect the claimant’s ability to carry out these day-to day activities.

8001010/2025 and others Page 7

Was the adverse effect substantial?

37. Again, the respondent’s position was that there was insufficient evidence of this. However, having accepted the claimant’s evidence, I consider it was substantial at the relevant time in respect of personal hygiene, shopping, using public transport and socialising. I do not consider that a substantial adverse effect has been established in relation to eating. Living on a diet of microwave meals and sandwiches is a limitation that does not go beyond the normal difference in ability that may exist among people. Was the adverse effect long term?

38. It is clear that the claimant has had the impairment of anxiety and depression from an early age. He gave evidence of this starting when he was 11. Although the severity of the symptoms has varied through the period, even at its best, he has been unable to socialise and has had issues with personal hygiene. Over the last 4 years, his ability to go to shops and use public transport has got worse. I am satisfied that the substantial adverse effects identified in these respects have lasted for more than 12 months at the relevant time.

39. I therefore conclude that the claimant was disabled at the relevant time.

Application to amend

40. Mr Cormack drew my attention to an outstanding application to amend made by the claimant. This is contained in an email from the claimant to the Tribunal on 2 September 2025. Section 11 of that email sets out a claim of failure to make reasonable adjustments. In correspondence, the Tribunal had indicated had that this application would be considered at this preliminary hearing was originally listed for 18 September 2025. Unfortunately, that hearing had to be postponed and was relisted to today’s date. We are therefore now much closer to the final hearing dates than anticipated.

41. The respondent objects to the application on the grounds that it was made too late, with the hearing due to start on 5 November, it was out of time and the respondent would be prejudiced as it would need to amend its response and to bring an additional witness.

42. Mr Morgan disputed that a different witness would be required but I accepted the respondent’s position on that which was that it was HR that would deal with such adjustments. Mr Morgan drew my attention to paragraphs 16 and 17 of the paper apart to his ET1 that he said contained the reasonable adjustments claim he wished to make. Having reviewed that document, I agreed that a claim of failure to make reasonable adjustments was set out there. This application is therefore providing further particulars of that claim and not really an application to amend to add a new complaint. I appreciate

8001010/2025 and others Page 8

this specific complaint was not set out in the case management note from the hearing on 26 June 2025. However, the claimant did not withdraw it. He is a vulnerable party litigant and he explained that he had not understood that the reasonable adjustment claim had not been included. He will be prejudiced if he is unable to bring the complaint that he had intended to make. I consider the balance of prejudice favours granting the application.

43. I ordered that the respondent would have time to amend its ET3 to respond to the amended claim. The date on which it must send a paper copy of the bundle to the claimant will also be delayed. Both should be done by 29 October 2025. The claimant agreed he would not be disadvantaged by this later date.

44. Finally, I apologised that the tribunal administration had overlooked that the respondent had agreed to judicial mediation. I will refer the matter to the Vice- President so see whether this can be arranged before the final hearing but there is no guarantee that this will be possible.
Date sent to parties 20 October 2025